THE ROLEPLAYING GAME
Second Edition Core Rulebook
2d20 System Designer
Nathan Dowdell
Project Manager
Jim Johnson
Writers
Mike “O’dah ziibing” Ashkewe,
Tilly Bridges & Susan Bridges, Rachael Cruz,
Alison Cybe, Michael Dismuke,
Nathan Dowdell, Keith Garrett,
Patrick Goodman, Jim Johnson,
Fred Love, Erin Macdonald, PhD, Oz Mills,
Aaron M Pollyea, J.D. Kennedy, Chris McCarver,
Troy Mepyans, Al Spader
STAR TREK ADVENTURES
Editors
Interior Artwork Artists
Jim Johnson, Marieke Cross, Scott Pearson
Eren Arik, Cristi Balenescu, Marc Bell,
Carlos Cabrera, Joshua Calloway,
Proofreaders
Alexey Chernik, Aurea Freniere, Michele Frigo,
Jim Johnson, Marieke Cross
Chaim Garcia, Nick Greenwood, Aaron Harvey,
Eva Lara, Jens Lindfors, Toma Feizo Gas,
Art Director
Matheus Graef, Vincent Laik, Thomas Marrone,
Ariel Orea
Wayne Miller, Ariel Orea, Dat Phan,
Paolo Puggioni, Tobias Richter, Vadim Sadovski,
Graphic Designers
Martin Sobr, Steve Stark, Vitali Timkin,
Michal E. Cross,
Rodrigo Gonzalez Toledo, Salvador Trakal,
Mark Whittington,
Justin Usher, Rhys Yorke, Eaglemoss Ltd.,
Stephanie Toro
CBS Studios, Inc.
Cover Artist
Paolo Puggioni
For Paramount Global
Marian Cordry, Stephen Zelin, Brian Bromberg,
Aaron Hubberman, Brian Lady, Danwei Lando,
James Salerno, Russell Spina
With Thanks To
Gene Roddenberry,
Marian Cordry,
BC Holmes,
and the many fans who support this game
MODIPHIUS ENTERTAINMENT
Chief Creative
Officer
Chris Birch
Chief Operations
Officer
Rita Birch
Managing Director
Cameron Dicks
Head of Brand
Samantha Webb
Head of Creative
Services
Jon Webb
Head of
Development
Sophie Williams
Head of Finance
Luc Woolfenden
Creative
Coordinator
Kieran Street
Logistics &
Production
Manager
Peter Grochulski
Lead Art Director
Rocío Martín Pérez
Art Director
Ariel Orea
Studio Coordinator
Rocío Martín Pérez
Photographer
Fátima Martín Pérez
Lead 3D Designer
Jonny La Trobe-Lewis
Senior 3D Designers
Joana Abbott,
Domingo Díaz Fermín,
Chris ‘Chrispy’ Peacey
Senior 3D Plastics
Designer
Colin Grayson
3D Designers
Ben de Bosdari,
Sean Bullough
Studio Painter
Callum France
Games Designers
Jack Caesar, James Hewitt
Community &
Design Assistant
Dom Westerland
Scheduling & Design
Assistant
Justin Talsma
2d20 Developer
Nathan Dowdell
RPG Design
Assistants
Andy Douthwaite,
Jess Gibbs
Studio Terrain
Designer
Julian Jeratsch
Lead Graphic
Designer
Akha Hulzebos
Principle Graphic
Designer
Michal E. Cross
Graphic Designers
Stephanie Toro,
Chris Webb,
Mark Whittington,
Leigh Woosey
Audio & Video
Producer
Steve Daldry
Editor
Bryce Johnston
Project
Management Office
Team Lead
Błażej Kubacki
Senior Project
Manager and
process manager
Gavin Dady
Project Managers
Daniel Lade,
Jamie MacKenzie,
Ben Maunder,
Haralampos Tsakiris
Project
Management
Assistant
Robert Hebblethwaite
Operations Manager
John Wilson
Factory Manager
Martin Jones
Senior Production
Operatives
Drew Cox,
Warwick Voyzey
Lead Production
Operatives
Jake Pink,
Miles Turner
Production
Operatives
Thomas Bull,
Rebecca Cartwright,
Louis Hartley-Edwards,
Jake Skinner-Guy,
Christopher Leigh
Assembly Team
Wendy Harris,
Elaine Elizabeth Hughes,
Michelle Richards
Tool Makers
Luke Gill, David Hextall,
Anthony Morris
Customer Service &
Accounts Manager
Lloyd Gyan
Community Manager
April Hill
PR Manager
Sophie May
Translations &
Publishing Manager
Matt Timm
Distribution & Key
Accounts Manager
Gary Moore
Sales Account
Manager
Matt Vann-Hinton
Marketing
Coordinator
Shaun Hocking
Marketing Manager
Shareef Dahroug
Marketing
Assistant
Georgie Reeve
Customer Support
Representatives
Chris Dann,
Jagdeep Thiara
Operations
Assistant
Stephanie Catala
Webstore Manager
Apinya Ramakomud
Financial Analyst
Valya Mkrtchyan
Accounts Payable
Manager
Ofelya Mnatsakanyan
Accounts Receivable
Specialist & Finance
Coordinator
Hollie Shepperson
®
Standard Edition: MUH0142401PDF ISBN 978-1-80281-223-7
Published by Modiphius Entertainment Ltd.
39 Harwood Road, London, SW6 4QP, England.
info@modiphius.com
www.modiphius.net & www.modiphius.us
Manufactured by 4V Games in Lithuania
Batch Code: 28572
The 2d20 system and Modiphius Logos are copyright Modiphius Entertainment Ltd. 2024. All
2d20 system text is copyright Modiphius Entertainment Ltd. Any unauthorized use of copyrighted
material is illegal. Any trademarked names are used in a fictional manner; no infringement is
intended. This is a work of fiction. Any similarity with actual people and events, past or present, is
purely coincidental and unintentional except for those people and events described in an historical
context. TM & © 2024 CBS Studios Inc. © 2024 Paramount Pictures Corp. STAR TREK and related
marks and logos are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Artwork and graphics © and ™ CBS Studios Inc. All Rights Reserved., except the Modiphius Logo
which is © and ™ Modiphius Entertainment Ltd.
STAR TREK ADVENTURES
CORE RULEBOOK
Foreword  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
Clear All Moorings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
A Universe of Possibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Chapter 5:
Your home among the stars . 177
Starship Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
Starship Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192
Spaceframes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
Mission Profiles and
Other Enhancements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 212
Starship Talents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
Starship Weaponry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 226
Small Craft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
Chapter 1:
A Star Trek Primer  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
Star Trek Essentials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Notable Civilizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Eras of Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Chapter 2:
Starfleet  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 41
Starfleet's Mandate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
The Prime Directive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Starfleet Academy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Duty Assignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Mission Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Away Teams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Chapter 3:
The Final Frontier  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 63
Strange New Worlds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
New Lives and Civilizations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Space-Based
Phenomena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
The Dangers of Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Spacetime and Subspace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Alternate Universes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Time Travel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Chapter 4:
Reporting for Duty .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 85
Player Characters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Character Lifepath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Creation in Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
Supporting Characters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
Talents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
Character Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
Chapter 6:
Technology and Weapons .  .  . 237
A Galactic Toolkit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238
Weapons and Gear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 241
Chapter 7:
Operations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 249
Basic Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250
Advanced Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 268
Chapter 8:
Conflict .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 275
Prepare For Battle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 276
Social Conflict . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 279
Personal Conflict . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 284
Starship Conflict . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 294
Chapter 9:
Gamemastering .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 315
Managing the Rules. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 316
Extended Tasks and Challenges . . . . . . . . . 329
Chapter 10:
Introductory Adventure .  .  .  . 335
"The Gorgon's Gaze" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336
Chapter 11:
Allies and Adversaries .  .  .  .  .  . 345
Non-Player Characters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .346
Characters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353
Starships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 363
Creatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 368
1
: . FOREWORD
CLEAR ALL MOORINGS
STAR TREK CAPTURED MY IMAGINATION AT A YOUNG
age and never let go.
I was hooked while watching reruns of the original
series on a little black and white portable television, the
kind with one cheap aerial I had to rotate around to get a
decent signal. Fortunately, modern viewers have better
and more stable options to use to watch the many series
and movies comprising the franchise!
What you have in your hands is the culmination of over
eight years of learning and experimenting with the
first edition and other 2d20 System games, along with
countless decades of storytelling experience and pure
Star Trek love combined across the entire Star Trek
Adventures team. Like Scotty and his team of engineers,
we’ve made a few tweaks here and there to enhance
gameplay, but you’ll find the game is very similar to what
it’s been from the beginning. I hope you’ll find the sec-
ond edition to be even easier to learn and to teach, and
that you and your group can use it to create some of the
most meaningful and exciting game experiences you’ve
ever had together.
I soon started playing roleplaying games and discov-
ered they were a powerful means to tell amazing stories
with my friends. We played a lot of different RPGs,
eager to try out different genres and game systems.
We alternately played as epic fantasy heroes, rustlers
and roustabouts, four-color superheroes, pulp science
fiction traders, war-hardened soldiers, Starfleet officers,
and more.
Over time, I realized Star Trek as a universe could contain
everything I wanted to explore in a tabletop roleplaying
game with my friends. Every story genre can be explored
within the Star Trek framework: mystery, noir thriller, ro-
mance, horror, action/adventure, drama, political intrigue,
broad and subtle comedy, war, even the occasional
musical. The possibilities are endless.
Thank you for your support of Star Trek Adventures.
It’s been a long road getting from there to here, and we
couldn’t have made the trip without you and your stead-
fast support. Very special thanks to all the playtesters of
both editions, to Christoffer Lundberg and B.C. Holmes,
to everyone who’s contributed to the line, and to all the
fans who offer feedback, support other players, run the
game at local stores and conventions all around the
world, and grow the game organically every day.
Now, take this book, gather your friends, create your
crew and starship, and go create amazing Star Trek sto-
ries together. To paraphrase Captain Christopher Pike:
Have a little fun along the way. Make some noise. Ruffle
a few feathers.
That brings us to Star Trek Adventures. In 2017,
Modiphius released the first edition to critical ac-
claim. Since then, we’ve expanded the game line as
the franchise expanded, with the addition of Star Trek:
Discovery, Star Trek: Picard, and the other series that
followed. We got smarter about how to develop and
present mechanics, player tools, and storytelling advice.
We calibrated the focus even more on Star Trek-style
storytelling and on the power of roleplaying games as
diverse community-builders and a means to create
meaningful shared experiences in a safe space.
And, whatever you do, do it boldly.
- Jim Johnson,
Star Trek Adventures
Project Manager
2 FOREWORD
: . INTRODUCTION
A UNIVERSE OF
POSSIBILITIES
“...to boldly go where
no one has gone before.
- From Starfleet’s mandate
FOR NEARLY 60 YEARS AND ACROSS
11 television series, 13 feature films, and
countless other forms of narrative, from
novels to comic books to games of all
types, Star Trek has delighted audienc-
es worldwide with its science fiction
storytelling set in an optimistic future
laced with hope, adventure, drama,
and wonder. From its conception by
creator Gene Roddenberry as “Wagon
Train to the stars” (a Western series that
focused on a recurring cast exploring
the frontier together) to its current life
in many active productions, Star Trek
stands unique among science fiction
media properties, presenting a compre-
hensive and consistent setting in which
virtually every story genre and type of
character can find a home.
Welcome to the Star Trek Adventures
roleplaying game! This rulebook pro-
vides you with a wealth of information
about Star Trek’s eras, styles of play, and
character options, all designed to help
you develop and play a character who
fits into the Star Trek universe. The book
also provides a complete rules system
for telling your own unique Star Trek sto-
ries. Whether you are playing a Human,
Klingon, Bajoran, Vulcan, Romulan,
Ferengi, sentient android, or something
else, this rulebook can help you and
your group build unique characters and
then collaboratively tell amazing Star
Trek-style stories with those characters.
With this game, you can take on the
roles of Starfleet personnel, venturing
into the Galaxy to explore, discover, and
encounter the wide diversity of beings
and challenges the universe has to offer.
You may be captains, commanders, lieu-
tenants, ensigns, or cadets. Enlisted per-
sonnel or officers, your characters are
Andorians, Bajorans, Humans, Vulcans,
Trill, and more, assigned to starships,
space stations, research vessels, or
colonies across the known Galaxy.
Or you may choose to play as a
Cardassian, Ferengi, Klingon, Orion,
or Romulan, or any other species you
can imagine, either in your civilization’s
spacefaring service or perhaps as a
civilian scientist, merchant, or more.
Perhaps your character is the first, or
among the first, of their species to serve
in Starfleet. What characters will your
group create and play?
This game can be used to tell stories in
any Star Trek era, from the earliest days
of the Federation in the 2100s to the
32nd century and beyond.
As Mr. Spock once said: “There are
always possibilities.” Where will your
imagination take you?
COMMODORE
NELLA XEN
Welcome aboard! I’m
Commodore Nella Xen,
commanding the U.S.S.
Challenger, one of
Starfleet’s many vessels
pushing the borders of
the United Federation
of Planets into the
unknown reaches of
space. I’m guessing
you’re here because
you want to create a
dynamic character who
lives in this expansive
universe, and to tell
amazing stories with
your fellow players.
This book is a time
machine (which is
partly how I’m able to
talk to you about it—
long story), a character
generator, a story-
building toolkit, and so
much more. It contains
everything you and your
group need to create
characters, build their
home in space, and play
the game. Unlock your
creativity, collaborate
with your friends, and,
as the Vulcans say:
“Live long and prosper.”
I’ll see you out there.
INTRODUCTION
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
3
: . All ARE WELCOME
ABOARD
In its first episode, Star Trek presented a diverse crew
representing a wide variety of Human ethnicities, skin
tones, backgrounds, histories, and identities, along
with one half-Human, half-Vulcan science officer. Since
then, the various series have added many more repre-
sentatives from alien species and cultures, adding to
the franchise’s diverse tapestry. Star Trek expresses
the Vulcan term IDIC (Infinite Diversity in Infinite
Combinations) where everyone is accepted equally.
 The Ever-Expanding
Star Trek Canon
This rulebook was developed while several Star Trek
projects were in active production. As a result, the
details regarding the Star Trek universe, characters, lo-
cations, and situations may be contradicted or amended
based on future episodes and other projects.
While official Star Trek canon consists only of what
appears on screen, your group’s game canon is what
you choose to make it. Use as much or as little of this
rulebook as you see fit, whether it remains adherent to
Star Trek canon or not. Make the Star Trek universe
your own!
This concept holds true for players just as it does for
player characters. Star Trek Adventures encourages a
safe space for gamers, regardless of their race, gender
identity, body shape, faith practice, intimacy preferenc-
es, or other traits. Differences among individuals should
be embraced and celebrated, and discrimination and
exclusion on any basis should be proscribed.
WHAT IS ROLEPLAYING?
IT’S LIKELY YOU HAVE EXPERIENCE WITH ROLEPLAY-
ing games (RPGs) (or even just playing make-believe)
and are familiar with many of the concepts used in
this game. At their core, roleplaying games are a form
of shared storytelling. They’re about stretching the
imagination to experience exciting adventures together
in the vastness of space, on hostile planets and exotic
locations, and learning something from the experience.
By harnessing the power of your group’s collective imag-
ination, you can experience situations far beyond that of
a traditional board game or video game.
There is usually no formal start or end to a roleplaying
game—the players and the gamemaster get together
to play, and sessions could take a couple of hours each
to a whole weekend to resolve. There is no winning or
losing; just a great opportunity to get together, engage in
conversation, create a story, and have a good time.
All games, however, have rules. This book provides the
rules to help everyone agree on what happens, to avoid dis-
putes over the action, and to help everyone work together
to make sure the experience is as fair as it is exciting.
 NON-FEDERATION CHARACTERS AND CAMPAIGNS
Many Star Trek characters and cultures do not em-
brace the IDIC philosophy or adhere to the generally
hopeful and utopian point of view portrayed in most
Star Trek stories. Often, these characters and cultures
are presented as antagonists for the heroes to battle or
overcome, which in some cases can be problematic.
We’ve learned over decades of Star Trek stories that
not all Cardassians are fascistic torturers, nor are all
Romulans treacherous schemers. As with any species
or culture, there are members across many spectrums,
from conservative to progressive, fascist to libertarian.
Tarring an entire people with the same brush or label
is as unacceptable and intolerable in the Star Trek uni-
verse as it is in real life.
To that end, if you want to play a Cardassian soldier
assigned to a Galor-class warship, run surveillance
as an operative of a Romulan Tal Shiar strike team, or
portray a Ferengi arms dealer working every angle of a
given conflict to earn maximum latinum, there’s nothing
stopping you from doing so. The game’s mechanics
don’t change. What will change are the tone and expec-
tations of your game in comparison to what traditionally
comprises a Star Trek story. Putting aside the tenets of
IDIC and the Star Trek ideal of an egalitarian future in
favor of another approach means your game will likely
have a very different feel from the intentions of the fran-
chise’s creators and the game developers.
And that’s okay—create your group’s ideal Star Trek
game together and then go play boldly.
4 INTRODUCTION
CHARACTER-FOCUSED STORYTELLING
WHAT MAKES STAR TREK ADVENTURES DIFFERENT
from other roleplaying games is two-fold: the depth of
character focus on display through all eras of play, and
the variety of stories that can be told.
: . Depth of Character
Characters make Star Trek stories special; they make us
want to tune in week after week to follow their indi-
vidual and collective journeys. Behind the main story,
through the heat of the action, the characters and their
relationships are often the most important element of
any Star Trek series or Star Trek Adventures campaign.
Frequently, the characters’ personal stories become the
focus of an adventure, and this game encourages and
enables this concept during play.
: . A Variety of Stories
Star Trek isn’t just about exploring strange new worlds
or encountering the ‘alien of the week’. One mission
could be a life-or-death struggle, stranded on a planet
with hostile forces approaching while the crew tries to
repair the damaged shuttle. The next adventure could
have a medical focus, with a crew member fighting for
their life against a strange disease and the medical staff
desperate to discover a cure. The episode after that
could be a tense political negotiation or an emotional
courtroom drama. The Star Trek universe can contain
any genre of story for your characters to experience.
CARLOS CABRERA
WHAT YOU NEED TO PLAY
TO START YOUR ADVENTURES ACROSS THE GALAXY,
you should assemble the following elements: players, a
gamemaster, and your gaming aids.
: . Players
Every game needs players. While one of these players
will be the gamemaster, you will need a handful of
players to take on the roles of the player characters. The
players work together, just like the crew of a starship, to
face challenges the gamemaster places before them,
explain how their characters act and respond to encoun-
ters and ensure everyone is having fun. You may have as
many players as you want in your game, though the more
players, the less time each player will have to maximize
their moment in the spotlight.
players—non-player characters (NPCs)—whether
they are adversaries, civilians, commanding officers, or
fellow crewmates.
The gamemaster also acts as referee and adjudicator for
the game’s rules. They not only run the game, but also
ensure the game is fun, fair, and exciting. If at any time
the rules are contested, or the players are unsure of the
outcome of a task attempt, the gamemaster has final say
on how the rules of the game are applied. The game-
master has to be fair and listen to the players to make
sure everyone is enjoying the game. Being the game-
master can be a challenge, but a rewarding one.
Advice for gamemastering can be found in
GAMEMASTERING, starting on page 315.
Every player needs a main character to engage with
the setting and the game. Your main character could
be a cadet at Starfleet Academy, an ensign on their first
assignment, or an experienced bridge officer already as-
signed to a starship or station. They might be a Romulan
officer or a Klingon warrior, or even a Ferengi merchant
or an Orion trader. They can be young or old, veteran
or novice, and look like anyone you can imagine. If you
come up with a character concept that excites you but
doesn’t reflect the traditional idea of a Star Trek charac-
ter, brainstorm with your gamemaster and fellow players
and craft a place for your character.
: . Gaming Aids
You’ll want the following gaming tools to play the game:
dice, tokens, and writing supplies.
DICE
Star Trek Adventures uses d20s—standard twenty-sid-
ed dice found in most hobby and game stores. The group
should have at least 2d20 per player, and two or more for
the gamemaster. Having more d20s on hand can be useful,
as a player may need to roll up to 5d20 at a time, depend-
ing upon the circumstances. These d20s are used for
many different things, including attempting tasks, resolv-
ing conflict, and determining results from random tables.
Players may also create a selection of supporting
characters to control when their main character is not
currently in the thick of the action. These secondary
characters can also be drawn from pre-generated
characters or supplied by the gamemaster as the
mission dictates. This means, for example, the chief
engineer’s player won’t be idle when the scene shifts
to the security away team beaming to the planet for a
lengthy encounter.
Advice for creating characters can be found in
REPORTING FOR DUTY, starting on page 85.
: . The Gamemaster
One player assumes the role of gamemaster: the host
of the game, the player who sets the scenes, describes
the environments, knows the direction the story is
generally designed to take, and poses dramatic scenes
and puzzles for the crew to encounter. The gamemas-
ter also acts as the characters not controlled by the
If d20s are scarce, they can be shared among players
and the gamemaster. Modiphius produces Star Trek
Adventures themed d20s, with the 1 face replaced with
the Starfleet delta symbol, though these are not essen-
tial for play. Any 20-sided dice will serve the purpose.
TOKENS
You and your fellow players need two different types of
counters: approximately a dozen to track the group’s
Momentum pool and any bonus Momentum gained
during gameplay; and three per player character for
Determination. The gamemaster needs a dozen or more
Threat tokens. Each of these resources is described
later, in Chapter 7: Operations. These tokens can be sim-
ilar, but using different types or colors can help to avoid
confusion—for example: poker chips, coins, glass beads,
game counters, or kadis-kot pieces.
6 INTRODUCTION
 Quark’s Gaming
Emporium
If you do not have access to a replicator to make the
necessary dice needed to play the game, Quark has, for
a nominal fee, made it possible to acquire official Star
Trek Adventures d20s (as well as a wide range of acces-
sories, sourcebooks, and supplements) from modiphius.
net or modiphius.us. You can order online or ask at your
local gaming store.
WRITING SUPPLIES
If you’re playing the game in a physical location with
others, it may be useful to have a supply of paper and
pencils for sketching maps, keeping notes, and track-
ing various game effects. The players may need to
record temporary traits affecting their characters—or
note the names of characters and locations, important
events, and clues to help them through the mission. The
gamemaster may need to record the health and status
of NPCs and starships and to keep notes of key details.
Sometimes the gamemaster can pass notes to players,
rather than announcing details out loud.
Other than this core rulebook and some d20s, no other
supplements are required to play. However, Modiphius
has published a wealth of material for Star Trek
Adventures to enhance gameplay, and all of it can be
converted to this edition with minimal effort.
It is possible to keep track of all of this with tablets,
smartphones, computers, and PADDs, but electronic
devices at the game table can be distracting and should
only be used with the group’s consent. If you’re playing
online, of course, you’ll likely manage all of this with a
virtual tabletop or social media platform.
While these different resource pools can be tracked on
paper, or by using dice as counters, keeping track of
these resources with physical items has a number of
advantages. First, it is easier to track the resources by
simply adding or removing tokens from each resource
pool. Second, it makes it much easier for everyone to
know how many of each of these resources remain for
use. Finally, there is an exciting psychological element
as the players watch the Threat pool increase, heighten-
ing the tension and adding a growing sense of uneasy
expectation, since the gamemaster spends Threat to
make the game more challenging and dramatic.
 A Safe Space
to Roleplay
At Session 0, you and your fellow players should discuss
what makes for a positive and safe game experience for
each person, and clearly note what you are and are not
comfortable exploring within a game context. Just as it
is essential for all Starfleet officers to have and follow a
common code of behavior and conduct, so too should
your game group have an agreed-upon set of guidelines
and safety tools, whether you are playing together in
person or virtually. Visit the Modiphius website to down-
load a free guide covering safety tools and on running an
effective Session 0.
!
240 245 250 255 260
INTRODUCTION
7
BASIC TRAINING
WITH THIS CORE RULEBOOK, DICE, FELLOW PLAYERS,
and your characters, how do you start your first mission?
The gamemaster describes the setting and what is go-
ing on in the scene, and you and your fellow players de-
scribe your characters’ actions as they react to events.
If you want your character to attempt something they
may or may not succeed at—fire a phaser at a moving
target, climb up a dangerous cliff, or realign the plasma
conduits—you need to roll some dice.
Then, roll 2d20 (sometimes more, depending upon the
situation) and check if any die rolls equal to or under
the target number. If so, it counts as a success against
the task’s Difficulty. The more difficult the task, the more
successes are needed, whether it is making a convinc-
ing case in a diplomatic debate, leaping into a hover-
ing shuttlecraft, or firing a phaser at an encroaching
adversary.
: . The Core Mechanic
When your character attempts a task, the gamemaster
tells you the Difficulty of the task (a number, usually
from 0–5). Check your character sheet and select an
attribute and department best fitting the desired action.
Attributes and departments have ratings defining your
character’s physical and mental composition and how
capable they are at various actions. Add the selected
ratings together to establish your target number.
Roll too high on the dice and you fail to accomplish the
task. It may put your character in danger, or worse, but it
makes the story more exciting. It is often when charac-
ters fail or make mistakes that the story really takes a
dramatic turn, adding to the sense of threat and tension
and making the adventure more compelling.
Using just the core mechanic for any task attempts
should give you and your group plenty of thrilling game
experiences. To enhance your gameplay with the full set
of rules, review Chapters 7 and 8.
MATHEUS GRAEF
8 INTRODUCTION
RULEBOOK STRUCTURE
THIS RULEBOOK PROVIDES ALL THE INFORMATION
you’ll need to understand the essentials of the Star Trek
setting, the elements you’ll need to create a character,
and the rules of the game.
PART 1: THE STAR TREK UNIVERSE provides a primer
on key details found in the Star Trek universe, briefly de-
tails Starfleet as an exploratory and defensive organiza-
tion, and discusses the science folded into the franchise.
PART 1 contains three chapters:
§ Chapter 6: Equipment and Combat Gear offers
details on various types of equipment, gear, and
weapons your characters may use.
§ Chapter 7: Operations provides all the core rules
you need to play the game, including how to handle
task attempts, how to gain and use Momentum and
Determination, and how the gamemaster’s Threat
pool functions.
§ Chapter 8: Conflict provides rules and guidance on
managing the many potential types of conflict in any
given adventure: social conflict, personal combat,
and starship combat.
§ Chapter 1: A Star Trek Primer is aimed at the new
or casual fan who might not be familiar with all the
myriad details of the Star Trek universe and how they
might apply to a roleplaying game.
§ Chapter 2: Starfleet provides a brief overview of the
United Federation of Planets’ exploration and defen-
sive organization, Starfleet.
§ Chapter 3: The Final Frontier presents a high-level
overview of scientific concepts present in the Star
Trek universe.
PART 3: RUNNING THE GAME is oriented toward the
gamemaster, the player who narrates the events of each
adventure, portrays and manages the many NPCs the
player characters encounter, and adjudicates the rules
during a game session.
PART 3 contains three chapters:
PART 2: PLAYING THE GAME provides a wealth of in-
formation you and your fellow players can use to create
characters and their starship. A selection of species,
character roles, and starship classes are available to
choose from. PART 2 also details the game’s ruleset, so
that you and your fellow players can most effectively play
the game.
PART 2 contains five chapters:
§ Chapter 4: Reporting for Duty explains how to build
a main character. Whether you are playing a Starfleet
officer, a civilian, or an officer from another civiliza-
tion, this chapter enables you to create a character
who fits right into the Star Trek universe.
§ Chapter 5: Your Home Among the Stars enables
you to build the other critical component of your
stories—the ship on which your group’s characters
live and work.
§ Chapter 9: Gamemastering provides the gamemas-
ter with guidance on structuring scenes, encounters,
tasks, and challenges; managing Threat; and effec-
tively using and adapting the rules.
§ Chapter 10: Introductory Adventure contains a
short adventure, “The Gorgon’s Gaze,” which may be
used as an introduction to the game, a standalone
adventure, or the starting point for a new campaign.
§ Chapter 11: Allies and Adversaries includes guid-
ance on creating and using non-player characters
(NPCs). The chapter also provides dozens of NPCs
and non-player starships to use in your game.
The back of the book includes a character sheet, a star-
ship sheet, and a personal log sheet to track character’s
development.
And now, gather your friends, some snacks, and a hand-
ful of d20s. It's time for you to explore the final frontier!
INTRODUCTION
9
CHAPTER 1
A STAR TREK PRIMER
1.1 Star Trek Essentials 12
1.2 Notable Civilizations 19
1.3 Eras of Play 30
PAOLO PUGGIONI
11
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
12
: . CHAPTER 1.1
STAR TREK ESSENTIALS
“We work to better ourselves
and the rest of humanity.
- Captain Jean-Luc Picard
AMBASSADOR
RAYMOND
MERTON
Greetings to you, fellow-
being. I am Raymond
Merton, Federation
Ambassador-at-Large.
Commodore Xen
suggested I guide you
through a discussion
on the Galaxy in which
we live, starting with
perspectives on culture,
economy, society,
religious beliefs,
and more.
If you’re not yet familiar
with our universe, I hope
this chapter serves to
both inform and whet
your appetite. If you are
already familiar with Star
Trek, feel free to skim
this as a refresher, or
skip to another chapter.
Whatever the case,
enjoy!
FOR AS LONG AS STAR TREK HAS
been in existence, it has shown
humanity and other species strug-
gling against their darkest impulses
and rising up to share in an uplifting,
hopeful future. Wildly varying species
work together to explore the greater
mysteries of science and philosophy
while still having different outlooks.
The Federation and its allies look into
the cosmos with optimism for the pos-
sibilities created by encountering new
life and new civilizations.
This hopeful outlook permeates char-
acters in the Star Trek universe, and
even more so with characters from the
Federation and its allies. When encoun-
tering other societies who are still racist,
sexist, or suffer from other inequities,
Federation characters are the first to
hold out their hands in friendship, lead-
ing the way to a more enlightened path.
What this path is isn’t always the same,
and all Federation citizens are allowed to
pursue their own happiness and achieve
their highest potential however they see
fit as long as it does not infringe on the
rights of others.
Even other civilizations near the
Federation see a hopeful future. The
Klingon Empire sees no threats their
warriors can’t handle and they are free
to pursue their lives as Kahless would
wish, a marked break from their past
living shackled to the Hur’q. After their
defeat in the Earth-Romulan War, the
Romulan Empire paradoxically felt
safer and more hopeful for the future
as they learned the Federation wasn’t
out to destroy them, and assisting the
Federation in the Dominion War meant
there was a distinct possibility of mend-
ing the millennia-old break with the
Vulcans. The Ferengi see an ever-grow-
ing market for their goods and services
as nearby civilizations expand, and
even the Cardassians have hope for
a better tomorrow after the end of the
Dominion War as democracy returns to
Cardassia Prime.
CULTURE
THE CULTURE OF THE FEDERATION IS
complex, consisting of over 150 mem-
ber species by the end of the 24th cen-
tury; nearly every species has an untold
number of subcultures, faiths, traditions,
and other ways of life. The Federation
is permissive with outside influences,
allowing other societies to practice their
faiths and celebrate their culture inside
its borders. This opens up a myriad of
possibilities for you to make a character
from any species and any place seen in
the Star Trek franchise.
Many of these species have been well
detailed, including the Vulcans, Klingons,
and Bajorans, but do not let that limit you.
The Klingons may be detailed more than
any other non-Human culture, but there
are ample areas for you to explore and
expand upon with this warrior culture.
The secretive Romulan Empire is also
CHAPTER 1
ripe for detailing. While the Ferengi are usually depicted
as pursuing capitalism, why not explore other aspects of
their society, like the arts or philosophy? Players and gam-
emasters can cooperate to piece together what is known
about a species and culture, adding details they feel will
enrich their campaign, or just for the challenge of doing
it. Use this opportunity to take a species and build up lore
and story to make your game more rewarding.
ECONOMY
THE FEDERATION ECONOMY IS VERY DIFFERENT
from what we have today. Federation citizens have left
behind both the need to work just to meet basic needs
and the drive to accumulate vast wealth. The Federation
operates as a post-scarcity society, with only incredi-
bly rare materials being unable to be replicated, print-
ed, or easily manufactured. What this means is every
Federation citizen is guaranteed their basic needs: food,
clothing, housing, education, and health care. Because
of this, the average Federation citizen doesn’t need to la-
bor in a career they may not enjoy or have a desire to be
a part of. The average Federation citizen is free to pursue
any career or pastime they wish.
With the post-scarcity economy, the Federation prizes
knowledge, art, creativity, and anything new from the
continually-expanding borders of explored space. This
doesn’t mean that there aren’t Federation citizens who
accumulate material wealth or desire to do so, but they
should be seen as the exception rather than the norm.
Keep in mind when portraying any member of the
Federation that it is a diverse culture that takes ele-
ments from each member world. Characters may be of
a particular species, but may adopt elements from many
cultures they find meaningful or pleasing. For example,
an Andorian could have a fondness for Vulcan plomeek
soup, enjoy watching Klingon opera, and practice
Human Shintoism.
A character joining Starfleet likely did not join out of
peer pressure or a need for good health care or a steady
wage. They joined Starfleet (or any nearby interstellar
civilization’s spacefaring organization) out of a deep
desire to explore the final frontier, to be a part of new
scientific discoveries, and to be the diplomatic face of
billions of Federation citizens. Your character will likely
be highly educated, as education is freely available to all
who wish it, and likely has pursued formal education in
things you may feel are hobbies.
What is your character passionate about, how have they
explored the boundaries of those activities or pastimes,
and how can that apply to service in Starfleet?
Characters from longer-lived species may even be in
their second or third professional career by the time they
join Starfleet. How does over a century of education and
the right to learn anything they wish impact their service
to Starfleet?
VINCENT LAIK
A STAR TREK PRIMER
13
 Federation Citizens and Money
The United Federation of Planets is, broadly, a collection
of post-scarcity societies where financial success and
the accrual of wealth are archaic concepts consigned to
history, but the exchange of resources is still managed.
Federation citizens receive a share of the economic
product of their world, which is more than sufficient to
provide for all their regular needs: food, housing, cloth-
ing, education, use of public utilities, and so forth. On a
day-to-day basis, no citizen of the Federation needs to
worry about lacking the means to survive.
A portion of this share is set aside as credit to be traded
on a discretionary basis for luxuries and extras—a visit
to a restaurant, a bottle of real wine, other items made
the old-fashioned way rather than replicated, as well as a
wide variety of trades practiced by skilled professionals.
Starfleet personnel and citizens who travel extensive-
ly, or who come into contact with those outside the
Federation, often exchange a portion of this discretion-
ary fund for an equivalent value in latinum or other valu-
able commodity, allowing them to purchase goods and
services from those who are not part of the Federation.
The Federation embraces a sort of “Economic Prime
Directive” in which undue influence is not allowed to oc-
cur by replicating goods to ‘sell’ to a civilization that does
not have replicators available to the common citizen,
or for large segments of the population to pool credits
to manipulate the value of hard-to-replicate resources,
such as latinum.
RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY
AT THE SURFACE, THE FEDERATION MAY BE SEEN AS
a non-religious society, but that isn’t the case. While it
is true the Federation is a secular society meant to rep-
resent the widest possible group, putting no culture or
belief before another, that doesn’t mean there are no re-
ligious or spiritual belief systems inside the Federation.
by brave warriors and discarded for meddling in their
world; yet their belief in an afterlife survives. Sto-Vo-Kor
and Gre’thor are the final destinations for the honorable
and dishonorable of their societies. Additionally, some
Klingons continue a long tradition of monastic life, with
remote monasteries on multiple worlds dedicated to
reflection on the teachings and myths of Kahless and
other esoteric tasks such as ancient bloodwine brewing
techniques or copying ancient texts by hand.
Humans have dozens of major religious and spiritu-
al systems still active in the Federation, with further
changes made to encompass the need to practice them
far from Earth in a Galaxy filled with life. The Vulcans
have long practiced spirituality that has deep roots with
monotheistic practices and asceticism. While there may
be a debate if the Bajoran religion is a religion or a form
of governance, as practitioners of the faith may actual-
ly speak with the Prophets at times, their religion has
incredible influence over Bajor. There are few societies
in Star Trek with religions as well detailed as the Vulcans
and Bajorans; one can assume every culture is shaped
by its beliefs, faiths, and philosophies reaching deep into
its past.
Feel free to bring religion or spirituality into your game
through your character. In Star Trek, religion hasn’t
disappeared; it just is no longer the defining aspect of
life that it was in centuries past. Many characters have
shown some faith or spirituality at times, with Spock,
Chakotay, and Kira openly practicing their faiths and
Sisko even becoming a religious figure.
One thing to consider when bringing faith into your
game is to be as sensitive to current religions as the
franchise has been on screen, often avoiding speaking
directly about modern religions and instead focusing on
alien faiths or ones that Humans developed later as they
went out among the stars.
In contrast, the Klingon Empire has a form of spirituality
at its forefront and openly practiced by its highest-rank-
ing members. Klingons have many practices and rites
that date to the time of Kahless and before, becoming
hardened in the society’s collective memory during
the occupation of Qo’noS by the Hur’q. Klingons do not
believe in or worship gods, claiming they were slain
14
CHAPTER 1
SOCIETY
THE UNITED FEDERATION OF PLANETS AS A SOCIETY
is one of openness beyond what 21st century Humans
are used to. The Federation prides itself on celebrating
its diversity, meaning there is no discrimination based
on species, gender (or lack thereof), age, language, or
place of birth. Members of every Federation species can
be found on its worlds, and while some worlds are more
suited to one species, no barriers are placed to prevent
citizens from freely moving inside Federation borders.
This freedom extends to speech, and the Federation
hosts hundreds of major interstellar news agencies
vying for stories and keeping the Federation government
under the microscope for its people to examine.
All worlds are allowed to govern themselves as they see
fit, as long as doing so does not infringe upon the rights
granted to its people under Federation law. Thus, the
vast majority of Federation worlds are democracies of
one type or another. Across the Federation, people talk
about policies and how they impact their lives, are able
to spend the time to research and understand societal
issues, and engage with the political apparatus in ways
only hoped for in the democracies of 21st century Earth.
While the official language is Federation Standard,
consisting of multiple languages from many member
worlds, its usage isn’t enforced by any official organi-
zation or governmental body within the Federation.
Thousands of languages can be heard at any large gath-
ering, and with the universal translator (see sidebar
on page page 17), all people can express themselves
fully in their own language and be understood by their
fellow citizens.
Explore how your character grew up in such a multicul-
tural society to give them greater depth. What languages
do they know without the use of a universal translator?
What holidays do they celebrate, and what foods and
traditions are linked with those holidays? Is the way they
celebrate a holiday different from most? How involved
are they in the vast government of the Federation, and
are they keen followers of news and interstellar poli-
cy-making? Did their society lead them to join Starfleet
or take an interest in diplomacy? With such an open
society, what friends of different species did they grow
up with, or learn customs from?
MARTIN SOBR
A STAR TREK PRIMER
15
STARDATES
THE HUNDREDS OF INHABITED FEDERATION
worlds all have different day lengths and orbital peri-
ods. Most of the time-keeping methods developed by
natives or settlers are still used on their homeworlds, as
tracking the progression of time and seasons is easier
using local systems. Even the slight difference in day
length between Earth and Mars (24 hours vs 24 hours
and 39 minutes respectively) is enough to require their
own daily clocks, let alone the differences in their year.
A further complication is when travelling in space at
high velocities time dilation can occur, and a 24-hour
duty shift on a starship might not equal 24 hours on the
surface of a world.
After the formation of the Federation, the founding
members determined a unified system of time-keeping
would need to be developed that was independent of
TECHNOLOGY
THE TECHNOLOGY IN THE STAR TREK UNIVERSE IS IN
advance of our own by many centuries, aided by
integrating alien technology under the umbrella of the
Federation. Even then, what technology and equipment
characters interact with are recognizable to us today as
they have evolved and developed from modern ideas
and science.
This section provides an overview of the most com-
monly used technology found in the Star Trek universe.
Chapter 6 provides more detail on weapons and devices
present in the Star Trek universe.
: . Communication
Technology
People communicate in the Star Trek universe with
handheld devices, desktop computers, or wall-mount-
ed screens. The primary difference is in how the
communications are transmitted. Over long distances
this is accomplished via subspace radio, also known
as subspace. Subspace communications allows for
transmissions at very high multiples of the speed of
light, allowing near instant communications inside a star
system and short transmission lags between nearby star
systems or starships. This means a transmission from
one side of a sector to another (20 light-years) takes a
little less than 3.5 hours.
16
CHAPTER 1
starships and set by a central time-keeping agency on
Earth, and calibrated using numerous pulsars and deep
space quasar positioning and patterns. This system is
called the stardate. Players and gamemasters should
remember that the stardate increases as time passes,
and that there is a rough equivalence with an Earth solar
year. After the 23rd century, 1000 stardate units is equal
to a year, so a stardate of 44000.1 is equal to 1 January
2367 at 0053. Prior to 2323, multiple stardate formats
were used.
Using stardates is a good way to keep track of adven-
tures and the order in which they occur, along with
being able to place those same adventures in context of
what was also occurring during the same time within the
many series.
: . CURSE YOU,
PEANUT HAMPER!
JUNIOR SENIOR SCIENCE OFFICER’S LOG,
ENSIGN D’VANA TENDI (STARDATE 58269.2)
People have weird pre-conceived notions sometimes!
It seems like everyone absorbs their own particular so-
cietal biases while trying to tribble-hole people for easy
categorization. That’s not how life works! That’s not how
science works!
And I’d know, because I’m a senior science officer on
the U.S.S. Cerritos, even though I’m a junior officer. So,
I guess I’m a junior senior officer? Anyway, what I’m
saying is you can trust I know what I’m talking about! I
have personal experience (like, a lot of experience) with
the prejudices people have against Orions. And sure,
some of us are ruthless, bloodthirsty, amazing pirates.
But all of us aren’t! Just like every exocomp isn’t a sweet
helpful little critter who adheres to the ideals of Starfleet
without question.
I have personal experience with that, too.
This communications speed is increased further by sub-
space boosters, and in the core worlds of the Federation,
instantaneous communication can occur over much
longer distances. In the 22nd century, power and tech-
nological limitations meant real-time communications,
even over as little a distance as Earth to Vulcan, were dif-
ficult to achieve without subspace boosters. In the 23rd
century, it would be difficult to get immediate contact
with Starfleet Command on Earth when on the edges of
Federation space, but by the 24th century, near real-time
communications Federation-wide were possible due to
an extensive network of subspace communication relays
and boosters. Even then, communication speed dropped
quickly beyond the range of these subspace relays.
when distant from a subspace relay; how does that
change the feeling of isolation your character may feel
while far from home?
The most commonly-used communication devices are
personal communicators—handheld devices or small
pins worn on the chest—used over planetary distanc-
es or to ships in orbit. Longer range communication is
possible with these small communicators linking into a
larger network, but typically long distance communica-
tion is accomplished with desktop or larger devices.
: . Hologram Technology
Holograms have been in use since the early days of the
Federation when holographic imaging systems were
used to record and display lifelike 3-D representations
of people, scenery, objects, strategic maps, and more
(perhaps your character has a treasured holorecording
of a loved one, or a place they’ve visited). Starting in the
23rd century, some civilizations experimented with ho-
lographic communication systems, though they did not
see widespread use. The most significant use of holo-
graphic technology came with the invention of the holo-
deck (or, in some places, a smaller holosuite). Developed
originally in the 2270s to address the psychological
needs of most organic life-forms to relax and experience
familiar environments—and do so in a way that utilized a
minimum of space in the ships they were installed in—
holodecks became increasingly popular with Federation
starship crews (despite a few technological hiccups) as
they became more advanced.
You should consider how even short time lags in
communications affect your character’s relationships
with family and friends not on board your starship. How
does it change how they talk to their family, and has it
improved or ruined other relationships? In earlier eras it
may be only possible for voice or text communications
Holodecks combine holographic imaging, force fields,
replicators, and tractor beams to create interactive
environments that can be touched as well as seen
(and heard, smelled, and even tasted). Standard safety
 The Universal Translator
The invention of the universal translator in the 22nd
century was a massive breakthrough in interspecies
communication. Starfleet guidelines, and general prag-
matism elsewhere, suggest that learning other languag-
es in case of technical faults, or to help understand other
cultures more deeply, is still valuable, but it is no longer
an absolute necessity.
and in their attempts to communicate with Species 10-C
through most of season 4. With these examples in mind,
it’s occasionally useful to know what languages different
characters speak and read.
In most Star Trek Adventures missions, the existence of
the universal translator means players and the gam-
emaster can ignore language difficulties. However, com-
munication without using a universal translator is a plot
point in numerous Star Trek stories, from the Enterprise
crew desperately seeking to send a message in Klingon
in Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country, to many sto-
ries involving Ensign Hoshi in Enterprise, to more recent
stories such as the communication difficulties faced by
the Discovery crew in the episode “An Obol for Charon”
Player characters are assumed to be completely fluent
in one or two languages. These are typically the com-
mon language of their service—Federation Standard
in Starfleet, or tlhIngan Hol in the Klingon Defense
Force—and either a language reflecting the character’s
heritage (an Andorian will be able to speak a form of the
Andorian language, for example), or another language
the character studied at some point during their upbring-
ing (a Human who natively speaks English also speaking
tlhIngan Hol). It can be assumed that every civilization
has numerous languages and regional dialects, with one
being the most prominent and used for government and
interstellar trade, as Federation Standard is for Earth.
A STAR TREK PRIMER
17
protocols prevent items on a holodeck from being
deadly, though accidents are still possible—for example,
someone skiing could still suffer a leg injury. Adding
artificial intelligence allows for interactive holographic
characters, and the use of replicators allows for physical
objects one can use or even consume. In general, ob-
jects created on a holodeck vanish when taken beyond
its doors, but small objects that were important in the
holo-program often can be removed, as they’ve been
replicated. A holodeck program can be paused, saved,
and altered while in progress.
: . WE ARE ALL MADE
OF STAR STUFF
PERSONAL APPEAL FROM THE DOCTOR
TO CAPTAIN JANEWAY, U.S.S. VOYAGER
(STARDATE 54732)
I wouldn’t think a being such as myself could be seen as
anything other than alive. I think, I feel…I don’t sleep or
eat, certainly. But I deactivate, and is that not sleep? My
emitters pull power from the ship; is that not suste-
nance? “I sing! Therefore I am!” to coin a phrase. Well, to
modify a phrase, if you will.
Many late 24th century starships are equipped with an
Emergency Medical Hologram (EMH), an artificial
intelligence designed to mimic a humanoid and pro-
grammed with extensive medical knowledge. An EMH
can operate in a sickbay equipped with holo-emitters
and is intended to supplement or temporarily replace
medical staff in emergencies. They are not designed to
be self-aware, though there are exceptions.
But to say life can only be one thing, or that it should
only exist one way, is not just logical fallacy, it’s outright
discrimination. All sentient life is worthy of the same
respect, whether we’re organic, positronic, or holo-
graphic. ‘We are all made of star stuff’, and yes, I do
include photons. If you prick me, do I not say “ow?” I
can turn down my pain receptors, of course, but that’s
beside the point.
Emergency holograms have expanded significantly
by 2399. Additional varieties include the Emergency
Engineering Hologram (EEH), Emergency Hospitality
Hologram (EHH), Emergency Navigational Hologram
(ENH), and Emergency Tactical Hologram (ETH).
Emergency holograms can be modeled on existing peo-
ple, including their memories and personality. Because
of this, they can be used, in an emergency, to fill most
ships positions to varying degrees of capability.
from a dedicated console, and is directly connected to
the rest of the transporter system. A starship usually has
several transporter pads, spread about the ship.
Consider coming up with a few ideas for the kinds of
holo-programs your character spends time in. Are they
a holo-novel fan who enjoys stepping into the shoes of a
fictional character? Do they spend more time in fitness
and training programs? Do they hang out with other
crew members in a simulated environment based on a
real location, or perhaps even a fictional one?
Ships also have cargo transporters, designed to trans-
port large masses of cargo. A cargo transporter operates
at molecular resolution, which is instantly fatal to any
living being transported, but requires far less power, al-
lowing the ship to load or unload cargo quickly. Safety in-
terlocks prevent transport if life-forms are detected in the
target. A starship usually has several cargo transporters.
Cargo transporters can be converted to operate at
quantum resolution, allowing them to transport up to 10
people in emergencies.
: . Transporters
A staple of starship technology transporters allow people
and cargo to be moved from one place to another nearly
instantaneously. The engineer Emory Erickson developed
a Human version of the technology in the early 22nd
century, but just as with warp drive, numerous species
have developed transporters independently, and by the
early 24th century, transporters were a standard feature of
starships across the Alpha and Beta Quadrants.
A typical personnel transporter pad has space for six hu-
manoid individuals, and operates at quantum resolution,
making it safe for living creatures. The pad is operated
18
CHAPTER 1
: . CHAPTER 1.2
NOTABLE CIVILIZATIONS
“A final frontier begins in this hall. Let’s explore it together.
THE UNITED FEDERATION OF
Planets is one of the largest govern-
ments in the Alpha and Beta Quadrants.
Seemingly growing by leaps and
bounds each year, the Federation
comprises hundreds of civilizations and
thousands of planets and stands almost
without equal among its neighbors.
The Federation represents more than
just a convenient political alliance
among species, and Starfleet is not
just an organization that keeps it safe.
The Federation represents a dream of
peaceful coexistence, benevolent un-
derstanding, and the willingness to set
aside differences in order to explore the
Galaxy. Starfleet is the Federation’s de-
fensive and exploration corps dedicated
to traveling among the stars to uncover
the wonders within.
It was not easy bringing together more
than a hundred species under one
banner. The customs of one species
may be considered abhorrent to others,
and several members once engaged
in bitter wars with each other. The
Federation’s goal is not to rule over its
members, but to uplift them all so that
they can be equal. If a civilization meets
- Captain Jonathan Archer
the basic criteria for membership in the
Federation, they can expect assistance
in cleaning their atmosphere, provid-
ing medical aid to its population, and
even using Starfleet to help guarantee
the protection of their holdings. Under
the administration of the Federation
Council and the office of the President
of the United Federation of Planets, the
Federation does its best to help others
achieve a state of peace so they can be
the best versions of themselves.
It is not always peaceful in the
Federation. Starfleet is often tasked with
mediating disputes between its mem-
bers and aiding Federation members by
providing them with technological im-
provements such as environmental reg-
ulators and fusion reactors. Rival powers
such as the Klingons, the Romulans, and
the Cardassians often engage in political
intrigue with Starfleet. The Federation
has had to fight these powers on
multiple occasions. Less influential
species such as the Talarians attempted
to seize colonies from the Federation,
and Starfleet technology is often prized
throughout the Galaxy and is a tempting
target for pirates and smugglers.
GAMMA QUADRANT DELTA QUADRANT
AMBASSADOR
RAYMOND
MERTON
The Alpha and Beta
Quadrants are home to
thousands of cultures
and civilizations, only
some of which are warp-
capable and dedicated
to exploring the cosmos.
Still, Starfleet and other
organizations encounter
new species on a regular
basis, which naturally
means ambassadors
such as myself are
constantly employed
to arrange first contact,
second contact, or other
forms of connection
between the Federation
and these new-to-us
cultures.
This chapter briefly
discusses some
of the well-known
species you’re likely
to encounter. We’ll
start with the United
Federation of Planets.
IDRAN END OF THE
BAJORAN WORMHOLE
FERENGI ALLIANCE
BREEN CONFEDERACY
TZENKETHI COALITION
CARDASSIAN UNION
THOLIAN ASSEMBLY
TALARIAN REPUBLIC
UNITED FEDERATION
OF PLANETS
ROMULAN STAR EMPIRE
KLINGON EMPIRE
GORN HEGEMONY
ALPHA QUADRANT BETA QUADRANT
A STAR TREK PRIMER
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
19
JUSTIN USHER
THE COALITION OF PLANETS
THE FEDERATION’S ROOTS ORIGINATED WITH A SIN-
gle planet in the Terran system. Earth had just emerged
from a conflict known as World War III and the atomic
horror that followed. Billions were dead, and most major
Earth cities were destroyed, leaving the survivors to
contend with fallout, starvation, and the fear of contin-
ued warfare. This all changed when Zefram Cochrane,
a scientist and engineer hailing from the old Earth
nation-state known as the United States of America,
endeavored to test out his revolutionary new invention: a
warp engine. It was with passing luck that a Vulcan sur-
vey vessel detected the launch of his ship, the Phoenix,
and their captain decided to make first contact between
Vulcans and humanity.
Humanity had some missteps, and came into conflict
with the Klingons, the Xindi, and the Suliban. The Xindi
conflict alone saw Earth attacked for the first time by
outsiders and hundreds of thousands were killed when
a Xindi superweapon damaged much of Florida. Earth
managed to persevere in the face of these threats and
made several allies out of the Andorians, the Tellarites,
and the Xindi.
From then on, humanity advanced at a brisk pace. Thanks
to the Vulcans, Earth was cleaned of its toxins and radia-
tion and Humans started to colonize first the moon, then
the rest of the planets in the solar system. The Vulcans
gave humanity new resources and technologies sparing-
ly; they were well aware of the dangers that could happen
if a species was given technology they were not prepared
for. By the time Earth developed its first Warp 5 engine,
Humans launched the U.S.S. Enterprise, an NX-class
vessel that brought humanity out far beyond their solar
system and into what was known as deep space.
Earth stood at the forefront of a new grand alliance
between civilizations that had not been seen for cen-
turies. Known as the Coalition of Planets, this alliance
helped protect the boundaries of its members and
gave them aid when needed. The Coalition proved to
be sorely needed at the outbreak of the Earth-Romulan
War at the end of the 22nd century. The Romulans had
attempted to manipulate other civilizations and weaken
them so that they might fall in line with the Romulan
way of thinking, and had seen their many plans foiled by
humanity and this upstart alliance. The conflict between
the Coalition and the Romulan Star Empire was brutal
and saw the use of atomic weapons in space warfare. By
the time the war ended, a neutral zone was established
between the Coalition and Romulan territories.
20
CHAPTER 1
The Coalition had a marvelous effect on its members.
Relations cooled and even improved between the
Andorians and the Vulcans, as they saw the benefits of
working together meant that they did not have to remain
constantly in a state of near-war. Galactic events such
as plague outbreaks or asteroid strikes were handled
better with the resources of multiple species rather than
just one. Captain Jonathan Archer, the famed hero of
Starfleet and one of the most gallant commanders of
the war, saw the Coalition could work towards some-
thing more. After 10 years of deep-space exploration, he
helped establish the foundation of what transformed the
Coalition into the Federation.
: . into The Future
By the dawn of the 25th century, the Federation num-
bered more than 150 members and stood strong after
surviving the Dominion War and conflict with surviving
members of the Borg, the synthetic life-form crisis,
and new conflict with the Pakleds. Starfleet had ships
traveling into almost every quadrant of the Galaxy and its
California-class vessels were busy rebuilding destroyed
infrastructure and conducting critical second contact
THE KLINGON EMPIRE
IT IS HARD TO FIND A MORE MALIGNED SPECIES IN
the quadrants than the Klingons. On many worlds,
Klingons are thought of as brutish, unintelligent, and
obsessed with combat. The Klingons themselves are
often seen engaging in seemingly strange rituals such
as starving themselves for days in order to see visions
or engaging in physical tests of strength such as the
throwing of boulders between the bride and groom at
their own wedding. But those who choose to get to know
them will find the Klingons are a deeply spiritual people
who believe in seeking ways to improve their bodies
and minds as one. They believe an individual’s person-
al honor is the most sacred thing they will ever hold
and that only through combat can a warrior meet their
proper end. Their Empire has stood tall for generations
and though often tested, Klingons always endure and
rise again.
The Klingons were a rising force in the Galaxy even
before the advent of the Federation. Their homeworld
had been unified thanks to Kahless the Unforgettable,
a great leader who unified his people under the belief
that honor was what was most important in life. After
overthrowing the last tyrants on Qo’noS, Kahless’ people
missions. The Federation continued to achieve great tri-
umphs through the centuries, such as new innovations
in temporal mechanics, transwarp drives, and medicine.
Unfortunately, the Federation was eventually torn apart
by the greatest calamity to affect the Milky Way Galaxy,
a disaster that changed the means of star travel forever.
In the 32nd century, The Burn was a psionic wave that
caused every active warp core in the Galaxy to explode
violently. In an instant, hundreds of thousands died, and
the vast majority of the Galaxy’s supplies of dilithium
were rendered useless. Star travel became rare, and as
the vast distances between Federation members took
its toll, Starfleet saw the Federation shrink to only a
dozen members. Even Earth, one of the original found-
ers of the Federation, took its leave in order to focus on
itself. Thanks to the efforts of the U.S.S. Discovery and
her crew, new sources of dilithium were procured and
Starfleet was able to travel the stars once more. Soon
old members of the Federation were able to rejoin and
the many foes that had come into existence such as the
Emerald Chain, would meet their match in the newly
rejuvenated Starfleet.
began building an empire that stretched out among the
stars. At one point in their history, the Klingons were
invaded by the Hur’q, a rogue species from the Gamma
Quadrant. The Klingons defeated them and used their
technology to rebuild their empire.
The Klingons advanced considerably after taking to the
stars. Possessing crews unafraid of the rigors of space
combat meant that the Klingons were able to secure
advanced technology from their neighbors. Klingon pri-
vateers learned the technological secrets of those that
hired them before they turned on their employers once
the contract had ended. Soon all starfaring civilizations
learned to fear the silhouette of a Klingon bird-of-prey.
The Empire advanced slowly, but one by one neighbor-
ing systems learned to accept the Klingons as their new
overlords or had to learn how to fight back.
The Empire’s first encounter with Earth came in the
22nd century when the crew of the NX-01 Enterprise
returned an injured Klingon courier to the High Council.
The Klingons were distrustful of outsiders and had start-
ed to move their society toward an even more militant
code of the warrior. Klingons increased their raids on
A STAR TREK PRIMER
21
Earth transports until Earth helped create the Coalition
of Planets. The Empire watched the emergence of a true
rival occur in a relatively short amount of time and start-
ed building up its forces for the day when they would
have to invade and remove this troublesome problem.
: . Commander Data’s
Reprimand
Fortunately for the Federation, the Klingon High Council
broke down in the late 22nd century. Klingon worlds de-
clared for Great Houses and the Klingon Defense Forces
transformed into their personal armies. The expanse
of the Klingon Empire became a battleground where
Klingon forces fought with each other mercilessly and
when they were not, they were pillaging and engaging in
piracy across the Alpha and Beta Quadrants. This would
come to an end at the Battle at the Binary Stars, where
the Klingon leader T’Kuvma activated a beacon sum-
moning the ships of the Great Houses to battle against
Starfleet. After achieving victory, the Klingons unified
once more and went to war with the Federation.
: . The Federation-
Klingon War
The Klingons were a threat like no other the Federation
had faced since Earth went to war with the Romulans.
The Klingon High Council unified once more and with the
addition of cloaking technology and advanced weapon
technology, the Klingons scored several early victories
in the conflict. The Federation had known only peace for
decades outside of the occasional border skirmish, and
with the Klingons they fought a foe so ferocious the war
left its mark on generations of Starfleet personnel.
PERSONAL LOG, CAPTAIN JEAN-LUC PICARD,
U.S.S. ENTERPRISE
I was forced to reprimand one of my officers earlier.
Commander Data was engaging in contact with a
species that was not ready for first contact and there-
fore broke the Prime Directive. He detected a primitive
communication signal and exchanged messages with
a member of this species, a young child, who told Data
about the destruction that was plaguing her homeworld.
Thanks to the efforts of Ensign Crusher and Commander
Data we were able to find the cause of the planet’s geo-
logical instability and put an end to it, but Commander
Data still had to be formally reprimanded for his actions.
He accepted it with the grace and humility that I have
come to expect of him, and I regret having to be the one
to place this mark on his record.
But truth be told, I am quite proud of Commander Data.
My duties as a Starfleet captain aside, I am amazed
that an artificial life-form such as he was able to have
such compassion. Now a species will get a chance to
fulfill its own destiny rather than see itself destroyed.
Did we save a species that would go on to become
conquerors? Or did we spare a species that will be a
benevolent new member of the Federation? Only time
will tell. Until then, I hope Commander Data realizes
that we continue to learn so much more about humani-
ty, thanks to him.
The war reached a turning point after the Klingons
seized Starbase 1. Thanks to the crew of the U.S.S.
Discovery, which utilized a unique form of transportation
that could place them anywhere in the Galaxy, they were
able to launch rapid strikes behind enemy lines and were
instrumental in a series of victories that brought the
conflict to an end. The Federation and Klingons existed
in a bitter stalemate that would go on for over a century,
and included several border skirmishes and the rapid
development of starships and weaponry.
It took a natural disaster to push the Klingons and
the Federation towards peace. The Klingon moon of
Praxis exploded, threatening to destroy the Klingon
homeworld. Thanks to the efforts of Chancellor Gorkon
and Captain Spock, the two sides signed the historic
Khitomer Accords. This led to a full alliance between
the two powers.
22
CHAPTER 1
: . The Klingons and
Working Together
If the Klingons have a weakness, it can be that they are
prone to squabbling among themselves. Klingons are
encouraged to develop bold personalities, and these
bold personalities often clash when they cannot agree.
A Klingon is taught from a young age that if someone
challenges their honor, they must respond, and some
Klingons take this even further by assuming that any
challenge to their decisions is automatically challenging
their honor. If a Great House challenges the honor of
another during a military campaign, they will fight each
other until the matter is settled before returning to fight
their original enemy.
: . REFLECTIONS ON
REPRESENTATION
PERSONAL LOG, CAPTAIN NYOTA UHURA,
U.S.S. LEONDEGRANCE
As my retirement nears, and I see cadets cycle through
my roster, eyes full of wonder as they experience warp
travel for the first time, I see that familiar look in their eyes,
especially from those cadets who look like me. They des-
perately want to see themselves in their own futures. It
feels so long ago I learned about astronaut Mae Jemison
in school, and how she inspired me to reach for the stars.
Every time I’m able to give a portion of that sense of
wonder and faith to those coming up after me, it’s the
honor of my career. If they can see it, they can be it.
One challenge with the Klingon High Council is that
there is always fierce competition for each seat. Some
Great Houses become so powerful that few could ever
dream to stop them save for their own rivals. This has
not only made it harder for the High Council to respond
to outside threats but it has even broken down into fierce
civil war repeatedly throughout Klingon history. The
most devastating and prolonged conflict between the
Klingons was throughout the early 23rd century and only
ended with the outbreak of the Federation-Klingon War
when the Klingons once again unified together.
THE ROMULAN EMPIRE
THE ROMULAN STAR EMPIRE WAS A GALACTIC POW-
erhouse whose presence dictated the course of politics
for centuries. The Romulans were not just a techno-
logically advanced civilization but they were adamant
about their own supremacy to the point their continued
attempts at expansion through the use of espionage,
sabotage, and sneak attacks from fleets of cloaked
vessels made them a thorn in the side of the Federation
since its very inception. Their downfall at the hands of
the Hobus Supernova of 2387 led to the destruction of
the Romulan Star Empire and saw their civilization scat-
tered over countless worlds.
great diaspora occurred on their homeworld. As the
myriad fleets of Vulcans made an exodus away from
their former homeworld, several settled in nearby sys-
tems where they either devolved into an earlier form of
existence or died out.
The Romulans were a splinter group of the Vulcans who
emerged after a brutal civil war almost destroyed their
homeworld. The Vulcans of that time period possessed
powerful technology but also had strong, almost over-
whelming emotions that threatened to destroy every-
thing they had built. The utilization of psionic resonators
and other devastating weaponry caused the Vulcan
people to seek a means to control their emotions and
saw the rise of the Vulcan philosophy of Surak, which
centered upon logic as a means to advance an individual
and to allow a Vulcan to retain control of their facilities.
But not all Vulcans agreed with this philosophy and a
After years of travel, the Romulans discovered the
Romulus system and settled there. The Romulus system
possessed ample resources such as the dilithium rich
Remus, which would go on to supply the Romulans with
enormous supplies of the rare resource and enable
them to build a powerful fleet to protect their home-
world. The Romulans developed their own disciplines on
how to manage their emotions and over time managed
to achieve a state of emotional maturity more on par
with humanity. This was not to say the Romulans were
without fault: the Romulan sense of hubris was always
felt to a great degree, and this colored their interactions
with other species. The Romulans believed they would
one day conquer the Galaxy and their advanced technol-
ogy certainly gave them an edge.
The Romulans started to take an active role in the
developments of other cultures. Wary of being caught
by other power blocs throughout the Alpha and Beta
A STAR TREK PRIMER
23
Quadrants, the Romulans dedicated themselves to abso-
lute secrecy and forbade any outsiders from visiting their
homeworld. When dealing with representatives of other
species, the Romulans used intermediaries such as the
Nausicaans and advanced holo-filters to disguise their
true origins. The Romulans developed a powerful and
effective intelligence apparatus known as the Tal Shiar
through which they were able to spy on other civiliza-
tions and steal their secrets. The Tal Shiar, through the
use of surgically altered infiltrators, manipulated others
into acting on their behalf.
: . A turning point
The Romulans were on the verge of waging war across
the Alpha Quadrant when they encountered a species
that would go on to become the greatest enemy the
Empire had ever faced: Earth and the young Coalition of
Planets. Originally thought of as little more than a back-
water world whose technological development would
never be the equal of the Empire, Earth would go on to
counter several Romulan plots that could have changed
the fate of the Vulcans, the Tellarites, and countless
others. If Earth had not foiled the Romulans’ attempt
to change Vulcan society away from logic and engage
in civil war once more, then there may have been no
stopping the Romulans from dominating the Alpha and
Beta Quadrants.
The Romulans attempted to defeat Earth and its new
Coalition of Planets during the Earth-Romulan War,
which led to the formation of the Romulan Neutral
Zone separating the two powers. Over the years,
the Romulans engaged in multiple plots against the
Federation, particularly when it came to trying to dis-
solve the Federation-Klingon alliance. The Romulans
were mostly unsuccessful in their attempts and usually
kept to affairs within their own borders. During the
Dominion War, the Romulans initially signed a nonag-
gression pact with the Dominion, which greatly threat-
ened the safety of the Alpha Quadrant. Due to the death
of a prominent Romulan senator by what was believed to
be a Dominion assassination attempt, the Romulans for-
mally joined with the Alpha Quadrant alliance and fought
valiantly throughout the remainder of the conflict.
It was towards the end of the Empire’s existence that the
Federation would greatly influence them for a final time.
The Dominion War weakened the Romulans, and a coup
led by the Reman leader Shinzon saw the demise of the
Praetor and the Romulan Senate. Shinzon’s plot almost
saw the destruction of Earth at the hands of a thalaron
device but fortunately the crew of the U.S.S. Enterprise-E
24
CHAPTER 1
not only defeated Shinzon, but also managed to gain
several allies within the Romulan government. Soon the
Romulans started to soften their approach on several im-
portant issues such as granting the Remans increased
independence or opening trade routes with other sys-
tems. As Romulus started to embrace new ideas, they
were unprepared for what happened next.
: . Hobus and the Death
of an Empire
The Romulan Star Empire’s demise would come not at
the hands of an enemy but at perhaps the hands of their
greatest weakness; their own hubris.
In 2387 while on a routine mining expedition, a Romulan
ship encountered an extremely rare vein of Red Matter
on an asteroid orbiting the star in the Hobus system.
Red Matter is a highly unstable substance capable of
magnifying the energy of a blast to an unparalleled de-
gree. While the Romulan Senate debated on what to do
next, the star went supernova, channelling an enormous
amount of energy from the star’s demise into the nearby
Red Matter and creating an even more massive explo-
sion that created a shockwave that went across parsecs.
The shockwave annihilated entire solar systems in an
instant, and while the Romulans did their best to evacu-
ate the worlds in the shockwave’s path it was much too
late to save their home planet. Romulus and its outlying
systems were destroyed, and the Romulans were imme-
diately turned into refugees who lacked even the most
basic of essentials. The Romulan Star Empire’s desire for
secrecy meant that much of their engineering and tech-
nological secrets were kept on databases on Romulus
and their primary shipyards and energy production were
likewise located close to the Empire’s center. The Galaxy
watched as a civilization dedicated towards conquest
and supremacy was gutted overnight.
Worlds that had long languished under Romulan rule
now fought for their own liberation as Romulan over-
seers were executed and precious resources seized
by the planet’s natives. Civilizations like the Gorn, the
Breen, and the Klingons annexed Romulan border
worlds and the once-mighty Romulan Star Navy was
virtually destroyed within a few years. Due to a lack of
technological understanding, the Romulans were unable
to reproduce the D’deridex and Valdore-class vessels
that had once been a feared sight throughout the Galaxy.
The Empire fell under the rule of local warlords that
maintained power through fear and intimidation.
The Federation attempted to aid the Romulans in the
25th century, but due to severe public outcry, attempts
to aid the refugees were largely unsuccessful. The
Romulans struggled to rebuild as a people and Romulan
society slowly shifted away from conquest and towards
more cerebral pursuits. Over time, the Romulans were
able to once more unite with their brethren on Vulcan,
CARDASSIAN UNION
ONE OF THE LATEST EMPIRES TO RISE TO PROMI-
nence in the history of the Alpha and Beta Quadrants,
the Cardassian Union (or Cardassian Empire as it is
sometimes known) was a formidable civilization whose
war with the Federation lasted from 2347 to 2366
and ended with the formation of a demilitarized zone
between the two powers. This zone contained colonies
belonging to both sides which endured long-running
conflict between the two powers as the Cardassians and
a rogue Federation militia group known as the Maquis
engaging in warfare against each other that saw numer-
ous colonies destroyed and hundreds dead. The conflict
with the Maquis ended when the Cardassians received
assistance from the Dominion.
The Cardassians prided themselves on a brutally
efficient justice system and an intensive and focused
educational system. Their justice system created worlds
where the slightest infraction was punished harshly and
the verdict was predetermined by the state with almost
no chance to appeal. The misuse of this legal system led
to countless off-worlders and Cardassians becoming
imprisoned or even executed for crimes they did not
commit. Their educational system stressed that each
Cardassian learn to hone their memories to the point
that they could remember images they saw even briefly,
and taught Cardassian youths that their lives were only
of use if they were dedicated to the state.
To understand why the Cardassians viewed themselves
the way they are, one only has to look at the events that
shaped their society. By the end of the 22nd century,
Cardassia was an advanced, if impoverished, republic
still utilizing the system of government they had estab-
lished in the 19th century. Under the rule of the First
Republic, the Cardassian Union consisted of the Detapa
Council, which oversaw all civilian matters; the Central
Command which oversaw the numerous Cardassian
Military Orders as well as their fleets; and the Obsidian
Order, a shadowy intelligence agency whose brutality
and skill would be feared well into the 24th century.
creating the new planetary government of Ni’Var. In the
32nd century, Romulans and Vulcans coexisted along-
side each other, with the Vulcans teaching their distant
cousins the benefits of the pursuit of logic while the
Romulans taught Vulcans about how controlling emo-
tions might lead to a more fulfilling existence.
The Cardassians of the First Republic were considered
gifted when it came to philosophy, art, and literature,
but rampant poverty caused their society to become
militant. By the close of the 23rd century, Cardassia was
ruled by the military which stressed aggressive expan-
sion. Within a century, Cardassia Prime was rebuilt into a
modern and powerful planet and the sight of Galor-class
vessels filled other species with fear. At the onset of the
24th century, Cardassia invaded and overpowered their
neighbors, the Bajorans, and occupied their homeworld
for over 50 years.
The Cardassians might have remained a formidable
power if not for key events that weakened them to the
point they became a client state of the Dominion. First,
the Obsidian Order was destroyed when Dominion
infiltrators convinced them to side with the Tal Shiar in
an ill-fated expedition to destroy the Founder’s home-
world. Civil unrest led to the overthrow of the Cardassian
government and the new Detapa Council contended
with the merciless Klingon invasion of their borders.
After a coup by Gul Dukat which led to the Cardassians
joining the Dominion and served as the precursor to the
Dominion War, the Cardassian Empire declined further.
By the end of the Dominion War, hundreds of millions of
Cardassians were dead, their planet was in ruins, and
their empire was reduced to a cluster of systems.
Yet, there was still hope. As the Cardassians struggled
to rebuild, their new government put an emphasis on
learning and the arts rather than militaristic expansion.
Cardassia would soon become renowned for their
textiles and their new wave of artists and poets, and,
by the 32nd century, the Federation President was of
Cardassian descent.
A STAR TREK PRIMER
25
FERENGI ALLIANCE
THE FERENGI ALLIANCE REPRESENTS A COMMER-
cial powerhouse in the Galaxy, with enterprises going
deep into the four quadrants. With their hands in
virtually every business and commodity, the Ferengi
will do their best to protect their business interests
through any means necessary. The Grand Nagus has
almost sole command over the Ferengi economy and
his commands are carried out by the FCA, the Ferengi
Commerce Authority. The FCA has broad purview on
how to protect and maintain the vast financial empire
of the Ferengi and are given broad discretion to do so,
including being allowed to intimidate others through
violence or even executing Ferengi who threaten to
destabilize the economy.
Ferengi are obsessed with wealth to the point it is the
dominating factor in their lives. For the longest time,
each Ferengi’s worth was measured by how much gold-
pressed latinum they had in their accounts. Ferengi are
starkly different from Terrans or the Vulcans in that they
only seek to better themselves if it means they stand to
gain a profit.
Ferengi saw their society start to shift dramatically to-
wards the end of the Dominion War. Under the auspices
ORION SYNDICATE
IT IS RARE FOR AN ORGANIZATION TO GROW SO POW-
erful that it can give Starfleet pause, but the Orion
Syndicate was one of the most ruthless and feared
organizations operating in the Alpha and Beta Quadrants.
The Syndicate was a criminal organization responsible
for countless thefts, assassinations, and trafficking of
illicit goods, drugs, and slaves. The Syndicate was so
powerful that it was often the target of purges and arrests
by authorities throughout its long existence, and was
thought to have been destroyed on numerous occasions.
Established centuries ago during the height of the Orion
Empire, the Orion Syndicate was not just comprised of
Orions. Members of any species could earn the right to
join so long as they agreed to abide by the Syndicate.
Members were expected to turn over a share of their
profits to the organization, to abide by their rules of con-
duct, and to never work with law enforcement or turn over
evidence about the existence of the Syndicate. Breaking
these rules came with a death sentence, and not just for
26
CHAPTER 1
of the new Grand Nagus, Rom, Ferengi society started
to see expanded rights for women, more fair business
practices towards laborers, and even a slight reduction
in the numerous fees and taxes built into the day-to-day
operation of their planet. There was some pushback
regarding this, and Grand Nagus Rom had to work hard
to keep his title as well as prevent these changes from
being rolled back by remnants of the old FCA.
Ferengi ships are led by a DaiMon who operates the ship
as a business venture. Ferengi vessels usually have the
latest technology of their era, as no DaiMon would dare
leave port without guaranteeing the upgrades they paid
for were the best of the best. The fierce competition in
Ferengi society means their scientists are among the
finest; unfortunately, most enter the sciences with the
hope they discover something profitable. Countless
breakthroughs are often dismissed as being not profit-
able enough.
By the 32nd century, there were Ferengi serving in
Starfleet, and the U.S.S. Nog, named after the famed
Starfleet captain of the 25th century, was one of the first
ships given dilithium to help spread Starfleet’s message
of peaceful exploration once more.
the guilty party in question: to become a member of the
Syndicate one must be witnessed by another, and should
a member break the rules, the Syndicate often demanded
the life of the one who vouched for them.
The Syndicate very nearly came to an end when the
Syndicate allied itself with the Dominion. While the
Syndicate’s actions had never been tolerated by the
authorities, they were content to leave the Syndicate to
law enforcement authorities and the occasional arrest
by Starfleet or the Klingon Defense Force. It was this
betrayal of the Alpha and Beta Quadrants that led to
the most effective and decisive purge of the Syndicate
after the Dominion War as Starfleet sent its ships into
Syndicate territory to eliminate its many bases.
By the 32nd century, the Syndicate had evolved into the
Emerald Chain, a collection of pirates, mercenaries, and
smugglers operated under the guise of a courier service
and possessing the bulk of warp-capable cruisers
available after the events of The Burn. When rumors of
a new source of dilithium emerged, the Emerald Chain
threatened to seize it for themselves and did their best to
BORG COLLECTIVE
FEW NAMES FILL INDIVIDUALS WITH SUCH DREAD AS
the mention of the Borg. Considered one of the gravest
threats the Galaxy ever faced, the Borg were a collective
of cybernetically enhanced organisms organized into a
hive structure. A single Borg was a dangerous opponent,
possessing a personal shield generator capable of identi-
fying and adapting to different energy wave patterns.
The Borg often behaved in perplexing patterns. If an
individual was not perceived as a threat, they were
ignored. Starfleet crew members reported they were
able to beam aboard Borg ships without being attacked,
and in the Delta Quadrant Borg ships routinely passed
through a species’ territory without attacking. When the
Borg decided a species has become too powerful or if
their distinctiveness might enhance the Collective, they
attacked in force.
The Borg's primary vessel was a cube ship, which was a
utilitarian but powerful vessel capable of being repaired
thanks to thousands of drones onboard. Utilizing a wide
variety of weapons, a single Borg Cube was able to deci-
mate the Starfleet ships assembled at Wolf 359.
The Borg assimilated individuals through their use of
nanite technology. The assimilated individual was taken
onto a Borg vessel where their strengths were cata-
logued, a role in Borg society was assigned to best fit
VINCENT LAIK
thwart the efforts of Starfleet, although they were unsuc-
cessful. As Starfleet and the Federation rebuilt them-
selves, the Emerald Chain was forced back into hiding.
their strengths, and they were surgically modified to best
fulfil that role. While it was possible to reverse this trans-
formation, those who had been assimilated reported
nightmares and the ability to hear Borg communications
years after their assimilation.
The Borg were able to construct a massive galactic tran-
swarp hub network that allowed the Borg to be able to
send their ships virtually anywhere. Their nanites were
also able to repair dead tissue and could be utilized to
heal or even resurrect an individual once dead. It is for
this reason that Borg technology was in high demand on
the black market.
The Borg threat was thought to have been eliminated on
numerous occasions, but the Borg always found ways
to come back. Abandoned Borg cubes were recovered
and isolated Collectives were encountered on worlds
where the Borg managed to break away from the primary
Collective.
It is believed the final destruction of the hostile Borg and
their last remaining Borg Queen came about during the
events of the Frontier Day Massacre in the early 25th
century. It was only through heroic efforts by Captain
Picard and his crew that the crisis was averted and the
Borg apparently destroyed forever.
A STAR TREK PRIMER
27
THE DOMINION
A VAST COLLECTION OF SPECIES ALL UNITED UNDER
one banner, the Dominion used brutality and fear to
keep its members in line. Those who did not accept the
offer of entry into the Dominion saw their skies fill with
hundreds of Jem’Hadar fighters and capital ships as their
governments were destroyed and replaced with Vorta
overseers, who administered each system under the
auspices of the mysterious Founders.
What made the Dominion so dangerous to the
Federation of the 24th century was not just their bru-
tality but their advanced technological skills that often
exceeded the understanding of the best Federation sci-
entists. The Dominion employed vessels whose polaron
beams were capable of cutting through Starfleet shields.
It was not just their technology that made the Dominion
such a formidable threat. The Dominion made use of ge-
netically-engineered soldiers known as the Jem’Hadar,
whose entire culture was carefully cultivated to focus
only on warfare. They were addicted to a drug known as
ketracel white, which supplied them with all the nutrition
they needed and ensured their loyalty. Overseeing the
Jem’Hadar were the Vorta, whose genome was modified
to make them genial, diplomatic, and ruthlessly manipu-
lative in order to force other species to comply with the
whims of the Founders.
The Founders were perhaps the most insidious threat
within the Dominion. Also known as Changelings, the
Founders had a strong distaste for other life-forms due
to centuries of persecution and genocide. They found-
ed the Dominion not only to protect themselves, but to
make sure the rest of the Gamma Quadrant left them
alone. Changelings were such a potent threat because
of their mastery of changing their forms; a Changeling
could assume not just the form of an object but most of
its inherent traits as well. Changeling saboteurs were
able to eliminate a target, take its form, and then spread
chaos behind enemy lines.
The conflict with the Dominion devolved into open
warfare in the mid-2370s. Known as the Dominion War,
the Dominion allied itself with the Cardassian Union
and signed non-aggression packs with the Romulans,
the Miradorn, and other species. The war lasted for
over two years and millions of civilians and military
personnel died. The Dominion established footholds
on Deep Space 9, Betazed, and countless other
Federation worlds and installations. The war ended with
28
CHAPTER 1
: . On Faith, lost
WEYOUN, THE LAST ITERATION
So, it has finally happened: the Founders have declared
that the great war in the Alpha Quadrant is over. Where
once our fleets were unstoppable, they are now in tat-
tered ruins. The Founders themselves have commanded
the Jem’Hadar to stand down. I woke up in a ruined com-
mand center, my stasis pod automatically releasing me
upon confirmation of the destruction of my predecessor.
We may have lost this war, but we will be triumphant
again! Surely the Founders have some plan which we
are unable to see, and this ruse of theirs (which it must
be) will lead to the destruction of our enemies and the
supremacy of the Dominion throughout the Galaxy.
But until then, I must be careful. The Cardassians are
traitors, the Breen surprisingly ineffective, and our forc-
es on this side of the anomaly are leaderless. I must
get off this unbearably bright and hot planet and back
through the anomaly. Once I’ve done that, the next
great effort begins.
the Cardassians turning on their allies, although the
Dominion exacted a heavy toll for this betrayal. It was
only thanks to the efforts of Captain Benjamin Sisko, the
Changeling Odo, and the crew of the U.S.S. Defiant that
the Founders had a change of heart and sought a peace-
ful resolution to the war.
There were other species working for or under the aus-
pices of Dominion rule. The Karemma were merchants
and primarily responsible for maintaining the massive
economy of the Dominion, although contact with the
Ferengi Alliance threatened to destabilize their econ-
omy as Ferengi business practices started to become
the norm. The Drai were scientists skilled in the art of
genetic manipulation and cloning, and were the creators
of the Tosk and the Jem’Hadar. Other species within the
Dominion went back and forth between helping Starfleet
and trying to avoid any suspicion of working with them
out of fear the Founders would send the Jem’Hadar to
seek bloody retribution.
OTHER CIVILIZATIONS
IT’S WORTH MENTIONING SEVERAL OTHER GALACTIC
powers that were major influences on the Federation
from the 22nd to early 25th centuries.
: . Join the Nyberrite
Alliance
The Tholian Assembly is a formidable empire and
one of the largest in the Alpha Quadrant to consist
of non-humanoid species. The Tholians are a sili-
con-based species whose natural environment includes
temperatures in excess of 207° Celsius. They are an
aloof species who prefer to remain distant from their
neighbors and would happily remain concerned with
their own affairs if not for the fact their neighbors prize
the bountiful resources of their colonies. They are able
to colonize worlds considered inhospitable to car-
bon-based life and are able to mine the rare resources
there more capably than other civilizations. Tholian silk,
which is highly prized throughout the Alpha Quadrant,
is a rare but luxurious product in high demand by vari-
ous civilizations.
CAPTAIN OSERRD, TELLARITE CAPTAIN OF THE
NYBERRITE ALLIANCE CRUISER ADVENTURE
Are you someone who seeks opportunity? Are you tired
of the brutal discipline of the Klingon fleet or the mo-
notony of manning a Federation deep-space research
station? Then join the Nyberrite Alliance! We are a fleet
of privately-operated vessels who provide protection
services for systems outside the purview of Starfleet.
Our ships are crewed by some of the finest beings in the
quadrants, and we are always hiring seasoned officers
with experience in Starfleet, the Klingon Defense Force,
and the Romulan Star Navy!
If you’ve always wanted to clash with pirates above
dying stars, protect hardworking colonists, or just want
a steady stream of latinum without being constantly
guilted about Federation ethics, seek out a Nyberrite
recruiter today! We have enlistment offices on Deep
Space 9, Orion Prime, and Ferenginar, with more offices
opening soon!
The Q Continuum was comprised of omnipotent
energy beings known throughout the Galaxy for their
abilities to alter reality to their wishes. It is unclear
what their relationship was with other energy beings,
but what is known is the Q were governed by the
Continuum, a body responsible for policing the actions
of renegade Q as well as settling disputes that may
affect the rest of their species. The Q encountered by
Admiral Picard was a particularly mischievous Q, but
that Q was not the only dangerous one. It is said that
the Q Civil War of the 24th century so brutally affected
reality that it caused stars to go nova.
The Pakleds came into prominence towards the end of
the 24th century. Once considered a simplistic species
whose development was rushed by outside influence,
the Pakleds created a small empire for themselves out of
the remains of other civilizations’ vessels. Their method
of speech appeared primitive, but xenolinguistic special-
ists suggested the Pakleds were more intelligent than
they appeared. Their use of cunning and guile alongside
unleashing overwhelming firepower made them a formi-
dable threat to interstellar trade.
There are numerous species in the Delta Quadrant that,
while remote, still influenced the Federation thanks to
the U.S.S. Voyager’s historic journey. The aggressive
Hirogen, large humanoids who were obsessed with
hunting and who viewed Federation ships as worthy
prey to be hunted. The many factions of the Kazon
controlled huge swathes of territory and the Vidiians
stalked the quadrant for the organs of sentient beings
to counteract a plague they were suffering. There were
also the Talaxians, whose contributions to galactic cui-
sine cannot be understated. It was thanks to Voyager’s
exploration of the Delta Quadrant that technologies such
as galactic communication and transwarp drive reached
the Federation.
A STAR TREK PRIMER
29
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
30
: . CHAPTER 1.3
ERAS OF PLAY
“I rather believe that time is a companion who goes
with us on the journey and reminds us to cherish
every moment, because it will never come again.”
- Captain Jean-Luc Picard
AMBASSADOR
RAYMOND
MERTON
In my brief excursions
with the Guardian of
Forever (the less said
about that, the better),
I’ve been reminded
that Federation history,
indeed, the history of
our Galaxy, is replete
with storytelling
possibilities, grouped
into specific key periods.
Let’s review those key
periods now.
THE STORIES TOLD IN STAR TREK AND
Star Trek Adventures speak to the
possibility of a hopeful future and a
united push into the cosmos. Though
the stories describe how these future
events are represented, humanity’s rela-
tionship with space and their surround-
ing galactic neighbors changes over the
centuries. From the brash curiosity after
first contact to the political innovation
involving cubic light-years of space,
many eras and outlooks can be used as
the foundation for individual missions
and campaigns.
Typically, campaigns and pre-written
missions revolve around a single era of
play, though space and time are mal-
leable and it is possible to visit different
eras in a single story or campaign if it
makes sense to do so. Regardless of
recommended eras of play, pre-writ-
ten adventures offer suggestions for
adapting their contents for other eras.
Perhaps the greatest example of techno-
logical change throughout the centuries
is spaceframes. Ships are designed to
house the technologies of the times
and are usually only used for around a
century until the technological systems
can no longer be contained within the
frame’s structure.
: . Eras on screen
For the most part, eras in Star Trek
Adventures are broken down by
century. Each of these centuries has
broadcast series and movies that use
the technology and political framework
of the time. While a story in Star Trek
Adventures doesn’t have to be adapted
directly from canon, these series and
movies are excellent references for play-
ers to get their creative energies flowing.
Review the timelines presented inside
the back cover to see which series and
movies map to which era of play your
group may choose to play in.
Aside from the characterization of hu-
manity, the biggest difference among the
eras of play is technology. When Zefram
Cochrane first broke the warp barrier in
2063, sustainable fusion reactions had
just barely been achieved, whereas in
future eras of play, fusion reactors small-
er than a person are installed in every
Starfleet shuttle.
CHAPTER 1
2199 AND PRIOR: FIRST CONTACT AND
THE BIRTH OF THE FEDERATION
MOST OF THE MAJOR SPECIES IN THE GALAXY BE-
gan exploring space in the 19th through the 22nd centu-
ries. Humanity was one of the last major polities to push
out beyond their system and was viewed as a nuisance
by many, since Earth had been devastated by climate
change and World War III. The Vulcans assumed the
rash and often illogical people of Earth would sow chaos
in the Galaxy, so they refused to share their technologies
with the fledgling United Earth Space Probe Agency
(UESPA) and kept a close eye on their foray into Space.
: . IDIC is SIMPLE,
YET COMPLETE
PERSONAL LOG, COMMANDER T’POL (2160)
My time among Humans has been challenging. They
can be so very impulsive, so overtly emotional, so…fra-
grant. Sometimes I question whether their adherence to
bathing in water would not be better replaced by direct-
ed aural waves. Their idiosyncrasies aside, and though I
am loathe to admit it, we perhaps have as much to learn
from them as they do from us.
While the Vulcans were monitoring humanity’s progress,
they were also at odds with the passionate Andorians,
seeing their relationship with the species turn into a
near war. This relationship was put to the test when
ships representing the UESPA began meddling with it.
Though the three polities didn’t realize it at the time,
these interactions would eventually transform into the
Coalition of Planets, the core of what would become
the United Federation of Planets.
“Meeting each other halfway,” as Humans say, is very
similar to the Vulcan principle of honoring our differenc-
es known as IDIC. At times I struggle to remember that
Infinite Diversity in Infinite Combinations is the whole of
it. “Infinite Diversity Only in Non-Infinite Combinations
that I Personally Agree With” has never been the goal.
Besides, IDONICIPAW is certainly more unwieldy to say.
With the addition of the Tellarites to the Coalition, these
civilizations united against a terror that shook the Alpha
Quadrant as a species that none of the them had seen in
physical form began exerting their presence. The mys-
terious Romulans were an enemy of the Vulcans. At the
end of the 22nd century, the Romulans were overlooked
no more as they aggressively attacked supply lines, com-
munication relays, and vessels located in and around
their space. These menacing acts drove the Coalition to
declare war. Using hit and run tactic and surgical strikes,
the war dragged on for nearly five years with both sides
suffering major losses. After the Battle of Cheron, a
treaty was signed that established the Neutral Zone and
ensured the Romulans would never need to reveal what
they looked like.
It seems some of Commander Tucker’s humor is still
with me. I choose to cherish it.
Once the hostilities ended, the member worlds of the
Coalition had earned each other’s respect and decided
to formalize the union. This formalization became the
Federation and its charter was signed in 2161.
: . 21st AND 22nd
Century Campaigns
This era is perfect for semi-lawless, Wild West-like
campaigns, as there are many factions operating without
regard to others. Also, because many warp engines can-
not exceed warp 5, pirate-like factions have free rein to
plunder ships before anyone responds to distress calls.
 Run this era
if the Group:
§ Wants simpler technology in the campaign.
§ Enjoys first contact stories.
§ Has curiosity as a driving force.
§ Wants to play a more modern (present day) story.
Another approach could be a campaign focusing on the
diplomatic and political landscape of space near the Sol
system. With dozens of species spreading out through
space, new interactions happen all the time and navigat-
ing the political waters requires strong diplomacy.
A STAR TREK PRIMER
31
 Technology Through the Centuries
One key factor in determining which era of play to use for
your game is what you want your character to accom-
plish, given the technology of the time.
2199 AND PRIOR
In the 2150s and 2160s, the United Earth Starfleet made
use of cutting-edge technology. The NX-class was the
first Human vessel to be able to travel at warp 5. The
introduction of phase cannons and photonic torpe-
does—predecessors to the phasers and photon torpe-
does used in later centuries—gave Starfleet vessels like
the Enterprise and Columbia an edge. However, they
had not yet introduced deflector shields, relying instead
on polarizing the ship’s hull plating to repel fire. Similarly,
early Starfleet vessels made use of grappler cables rath-
er than tractor beams. The Enterprise was also the first
Human vessel to be equipped with a transporter capable
of transporting people, rather than just cargo.
tools. Transporters capable of moving people are ubiq-
uitous and personnel transport to and from a planetary
surface more often than they use a shuttle.
Personnel carry phasers and tricorders regularly, and
the universal translator is much more compact, with ver-
sions built into standard communicators. Food synthe-
sizers allow the near-instantaneous production of a wide
range of foods, and replicators enable crews to make
spare parts for long journeys.
By the end of this century, starships able to travel at warp
9 were becoming more common, and the experimental
U.S.S. Excelsior served as a testbed for many advances
in faster-than-light travel collectively referred to as
transwarp. While it was less successful than was hoped,
the lessons learned would still revolutionize warp travel
for generations to come.
2300 TO 2399
By the 24th century, most of the technologies common-
place a hundred years earlier had been refined further.
The biggest differences to technology is the introduction
of interactive holography and the widespread adoption
of replicators.
When it comes to personnel, the phase pistol and parti-
cle rifle are the standard weaponry of the time, preced-
ing the introduction of phasers. Early scanners—like the
more advanced tricorders that would replace them—aid
Starfleet officers in studying phenomena and analyzing
problems. The universal translator was also invented at
this time, but it was experimental at first; the linguacode
translation matrix developed by noted exo-linguist Hoshi
Sato made the universal translator much more reliable.
When it comes to sustaining the crew on a long journey,
protein resequencing allows a starship to synthesize a
range of different foods, though this is normally supple-
mented by produce from a hydroponics bay.
Starfleet adopted several technologies from its allies
over the latter decades of this century, integrating
shields, tractor beams, and several advances in warp
propulsion and energy weaponry. The earliest ships of
the century had all been made obsolete due to advances
made during the Earth-Romulan War and the founding of
the Federation.
Holography, specifically in the forms of holodecks and
holosuites, allow realistic simulations of environments,
situations, and even people to be created for training,
study, or recreation. As the technology grows more ad-
vanced, the creation of holographic entities such as the
Emergency Medical Hologram becomes possible, and
holo-emitters can simulate matter on a molecular level,
producing near-perfect simulacra of people and places.
These developments in holography continue to advance
to the end of the century, with holographic crews able to
supplement personnel on ships with small crews like
La Sirena.
2200 TO 2299
A century after the founding of the United Federation of
Planets, many of the technologies new at that time had
become commonplace. Starships capable of achieving
warp 7 and warp 8 were Starfleet’s ships of the line, and
phasers, photon torpedoes, deflector shields, and tractor
beams are all part of a ship’s standard complement of
Other advances in synthetic life and artificial intelligence
make strides, with the works of Doctor Noonien Soong
at the forefront of the field, with his androids Data and
Lore serving as exemplar and cautionary tale, respec-
tively. However, this field experienced a major setback
in 2385 when a major rebellion of synthetic laborers
resulted in a devastating attack on the Utopia Planitia
shipyards on Mars.
32
CHAPTER 1
 Technology Through the Centuries... Continued
Replicators—as an outgrowth of transporter technolo-
gy—are a revolutionary advantage, allowing inanimate
objects to be recreated instantly, accurate to a molecular
level. This allows food to be created, but also a great
many other common items, and those same items can
be recycled by placing them back into the replicator and
dematerialized. Replicators are also used to supplement
life support: dematerializing surplus carbon dioxide
and replacing it with oxygen to maintain a breathable
atmosphere, and replicating all the water needed aboard
ships and starbases, while dematerializing waste. The
most sophisticated replicators—operating at the same
quantum level as personnel transporters—can even rep-
licate tissue for organ transplants, blood transfusions,
and other medical purposes, though this takes much
more computing power.
Conflicts with the Borg and the Dominion, and the
loss and recovery of the U.S.S. Voyager from the Delta
Quadrant, furthered technology development, with many
experiments in new forms of propulsion, power sources,
weapons, and defense.
2500 TO 3099
While so much of this time frame is subject to para-
doxes from the Temporal Wars, several advances in
defensive and offensive technologies are likely to be
accurate. Many ships are outfitted with temporally-an-
choring shields which protects ships from the temporal
displacement and chroniton weapons that dominated
the later years of the wars. Additionally, chroniton torpe-
does and particle weapons are used on many fields of
battle, slowing or accelerating enemies into disadvanta-
geous positions.
3100 TO 3199+
Technologies of the 32nd century developed to the point
where incredible computer processing power combined
with matter replication allowed for equipment to be min-
iaturized into very small volumes. Transporters, which
in the 24th century had taken up hundreds of square
meters, could now be contained in objects as small as
combadges. IMT-C stemming from the temporal cold
war and using closed time like curves and probabilistic
interstitial computronics, allowed computers nearly
instant access to vast amounts of information and
could even predict future outcomes to a high degree of
success. Self-aware AI was limited to specific regions
of the Federation datascape, but fully synthetic species
of life-forms that existed entirely as flowing information
coexisted with biological species.
2400 TO 2499
Starfleet begins to reverse-engineer Borg technolo-
gy. Not only does Starfleet create shield emitters that
can project shields over other ships, but the emitters
can also power up a nearby ship’s shields. In addition,
some ships implement nanites that begin repairing
hull damage the moment it’s inflicted. Starfleet begins
experimenting with different particles in their phasers
and torpedoes with chronitons, gravitons, polarons,
and tetryons, providing a versatile armament that could
provide different advantages over the multitude of ene-
mies Starfleet encounters. In addition to exotic particles,
several ships are outfitted with massive weapons known
as spinal lances that run the length of their secondary
hulls. Capable of releasing massive amounts of energy
in a single shot, these weapons are extremely powerful
but are just as restrictive as fixed canons from the 22nd
century in that the ship needs to be maneuvered into
position to fire them.
While rapid technological develop was nearly stopped by
The Burn and the easy exchange of physical goods due
to more difficult faster-than-light transit, the Federation
member worlds continued to exchange information,
research, and new ideas via subspace. Matter replication
technology could instantly build a device designed on a
world dozens of parsecs away, and holographic sub-
space communications ensured scientists felt like they
were in the same room with their colleagues.
As the Federation and associated splinter groups
recover, a new golden age of science and technology is
blooming.
A STAR TREK PRIMER
33
2200 TO 2299: EXPLORATION AND
EXPANSION
AS THE CENTURY TURNS, THE UNITED FEDERATION
of Planets continues to work out the kinks of their
fledgling union and the Klingon Empire is distracted by
a series of internal house wars. While slow at first, with
many planets not trusting the Federation, the expansion
speeds up near the end of the century, incorporating
dozens of new member worlds into the fold.
war against the United Federation of Planets in 2256 and,
though he died early in the war, his followers continued to
attack the Federation, whittling their defenses by nearly
75% before a cease-fire was struck in late 2257. Though
taking course over a relatively short amount of time, the
Federation-Klingon War of 2256 was the most devastating
war the Federation had been a part of to date.
: . AD ASTRA PER ASPERA
PERSONAL LOG, LT. CMDR. UNA CHIN-RILEY, U.S.S.
ENTERPRISE (STARDATE 2397)
It’s remarkable how even a place as welcoming and
friendly as the Federation can still maintain biases
against those who are different. Even Starfleet has
lingering prejudices. I knew that going in, but I signed up
anyway, even though it meant I had to hide the truth of
who I really am.
No one should ever have to do that, and yet it’s exactly
what I did. Why would I do that? I’ve asked myself that so
many times, and it comes down to that I believe they can
be better. I believe they want to be better. And I believe
in the capacity for change. Anyone can. Anyone will…if
they want to.
So, the question for the Federation, for Starfleet, for all of
us is this: who do we want to be?
Meanwhile, in the shadow of the war, an old enemy
began pushing their borders beyond the neutral zone
established nearly a century prior. Seeing the recovering
Federation as distracted and easy to manipulate, the
all-but-forgotten Romulan Star Empire began striking
at Starfleet vessels that came close to the neutral zone.
These engagements eventually led to the Romulans
revealing who they truly were: a splinter species of
Vulcans who had rejected Surak’s reforms. The secret of
the origin of the Romulans had been stricken from the
telling of Vulcan history as they were considered Surak’s
biggest failure. Now, after taking a century to organize
their people, the Romulan Star Empire became a galac-
tic threat that no one could ignore.
: . 23rd Century
Campaigns
While many campaigns in this era revolve around explo-
ration and gaining new knowledge, the time is also one
where espionage and reconnaissance is extremely im-
portant. With neutral zones along both the Klingon and
Romulan borders, monitoring and reporting on adver-
sary activities is a necessity to ensure another war won’t
break out. This reconnaissance often takes on the guise
of listening posts but, just as both the Klingons and
Romulans were doing, Starfleet sometimes conducted
covert missions into the neutral zones to chart planets
that may one day be targets that gave their enemies an
excuse to breach the neutral zones themselves.
As scientific knowledge and experimentation began
being shared among Federation worlds, several techno-
logical advancements became the focus of both scien-
tists and engineers alike. The first piece of technology
that revolutionized starships and their computing power
was the duotronic computer system. This system allowed
ships to process more data than they ever had before and
paved the way for the advanced transporters and replica-
tors to come in future decades. The second technolog-
ical focus was the warp speed barrier. Several projects
were introduced to try to move ships faster than warp 10,
including the ‘Great Experiment’ transwarp drive and the
displacement-activated spore hub drive.
 Run this era
if the group:
When the expansion of the United Federation of Planets
accelerated, a lone Klingon sought to bring their houses
together under a single cause in the name of Kahless the
Great. To instigate this union, T’Kuvma orchestrated a
§ Wants to engage in diplomacy or espionage stories.
§ Wants to explore their curiosity.
§ Wishes to explore war stories.
§ Enjoys weird new science concepts.
§ Enjoys exploration for the sake of exploring.
34
CHAPTER 1
2300 TO 2399: NEW ALLIES AND
NEW ADVERSARIES
AS THE CENTURY TURNED, BOTH THE UNITED
Federation of Planets and the Klingon Empire continued
to rapidly expand their territory in the Beta Quadrant,
nearly enveloping the Romulan Star Empire’s region
as the secretive nature of the polity’s government kept
them from expanding as rapidly. With the Federation
and Klingons surrounding nearly half of the Romulan’s
territory, the Romulan Imperial Senate was forced to
abide by the newly defined neutral zone and to try to find
common ground with their two greatest rivals; or at least
that’s what the Senate wanted them to believe.
interface and isolinear computers. These advances gave
ships customizability and processing speed at their
stations and freed up much-needed power for the other
new technologies on the vessel, such as stronger tractor
beams and shields.
The latter half of the 24th century saw much turmoil
which began with the crew of the U.S.S. Enterprise-D
being exposed to an alien collective known as the Borg.
During this encounter, Captain Picard was assimilated,
and became the entity known as Locutus. Under this new
moniker, Locutus helped lead one of the most devastat-
ing attacks in Federation history, the Battle of Wolf 359.
This attack left nearly 40 ships destroyed and roughly
11,000 officers dead. This attack was the inciting event
for Stafleet to begin working on more powerful weapons
and warships while moving toward the 25th century.
It was with this cover the Romulans began their push
into the Shackleton Expanse, a region their enemies
had not begun exploring in earnest. This push led to the
Battle of Narendra III in 2344 in which the Romulans
attempted to remove the Federation and Klingon
Empire from their one outpost on the edge of the
Shackleton Expanse. With a united front, the Klingons
and Federation fought off the Romulan attack and then
signed a treaty in the wake of the battle. This treaty
called for a joint Federation and Klingon presence on
Narendra Station so both polities could begin exploring
this new tract of space.
While the Beta Quadrant saw much action among the
three largest cultures in the Orion Spur, the Federation
also continued its push into the Alpha Quadrant. It was
here the Federation met the Cardassian Union, a totali-
tarian military dictatorship that had dominated its region
with an iron fist. With Cardassian Central Command and
the Obsidian Order unified as a single force, the Union
conquered numerous worlds in the Alpha Quadrant,
including the sovereign planet of Bajor.
The expansion outward was made possible by advanc-
es in several technologies implemented in the early
part of the century. Older ships became overshadowed
by newer vessels that boasted the LCARS computer
: . WE CAN DO BETTER
With no clear border established between the United
Federation of Planets and the Cardassian Union, there
were several instances of both factions calling claim to
the same planets, and even having settlers from both
cultures setting up on the same worlds. This led to the
Federation-Cardassian War of 2347–2366. This war
led to planets in the region forming their own standing
militaries and militias, most notable the Maquis, who
continued to fight the Cardassian occupation of worlds
even after the war had ended.
PERSONAL LOG OF LT. GEORDI LA FORGE,
U.S.S. ENTERPRISE (STARDATE 42073.5)
History can be rough. It’s important we learn about it,
and the way things really were, but I’ll be the first to tell
you it wasn’t rosy. People with disabilities were pitied,
or held up as “inspiration” for the non-disabled, or were
kept out of public life because it was never set up to
accommodate them.
But I can personally see how far we’ve come, how
we can do whatever we set our minds to if we’re just
given a chance. I started off as a conn officer, and now
I’m chief engineer of a Galaxy-class ship! It’s amazing
what a society can do when it makes space to care for
everyone.
To make things even more dire for the Federation, the
Borg appeared again and launched an assault on Earth.
Starfleet’s response was quickly thwarted as the U.S.S.
Enterprise-E raced to engage. With the combined efforts
of the U.S.S. Enterprise and the U.S.S. Defiant, the lone
Borg Cube was destroyed, but not before it launched a
sphere ship that created a temporal vortex, whisking it
and the Enterprise away to the past where Picard en-
countered, and eventually defeated, the Borg Queen.
A STAR TREK PRIMER
35
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
In the last third of the century, the Federation made
contact with the Gamma Quadrant using the Bajoran
wormhole near Deep Space 9. At relatively the same
time, the Starfleet ship U.S.S. Voyager was transported
to the Delta Quadrant. Both of these interactions would
not only open up possibilities for Federation expansion,
but also introduce the home space of their greatest
enemies to date, the Borg and the Dominion.
The Dominion War was one of the largest wars in galac-
tic history, pulling in worlds from across the quadrants.
Led by the terrifying Changeling Founders, the Dominion
stopped at nothing as it tried to purge the Galaxy of
“solids.” Throughout the war, many allies and adversar-
ies swapped sides based on their own needs, making
it difficult to trust any civilization. After years of conflict
and heavy losses to all major species in the Galaxy, the
Dominion war ended when Starfleet developed a cure
for the morphogenic virus that was killing every change-
ling in the Great Link.
While the Dominion War was raging, the returned
Klingon Emperor Kahless the Unforgettable was biding
his time and gathering followers as the rest of the em-
pire was distracted. Kahless sought to use his zealots
36
CHAPTER 1
to wage a war against the gods. This war culminated in
what became known as the Day of Blood: a worldwide
rebellion on Qo’noS that saw millions of Klingons die
at the hand of Red Path insurgents within a single 26-
hour day. Further bloodshed—and the rise of Kahless
to supreme power over the Klingon Empire—was
only averted due to direct intervention by the Starfleet
vessels Defiant and Theseus.
Meanwhile, in the Delta Quadrant, the U.S.S. Voyager
stumbled upon many new species that could one
day become potential allies on their journey home.
Unbeknownst to Captain Janeway or her crew, their path
took them through the heart of Borg space. After suffer-
ing numerous losses, the U.S.S. Voyager’s crew was able
to destroy the Borg’s transwarp hub, trapping a majority
of what remained of the Borg in the Delta Quadrant, and
cutting them off from the rest of the collectives scattered
throughout the Galaxy.
Shortly after Voyager returned from the Delta Quadrant,
it was discovered that the Hobus star had destabi-
lized and would go supernova in just a few years.
Unfortunately, both Romulus and Remus were in the
path of the explosion, leading to several initiatives to
: . LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL,
ESPECIALLY TONGO
RECOVERED RECORDING OF LT. CMDR. JADZIA
DAX FROM “GUEST SURVEILLANCE FOR ANTI-
THEFT MEASURES,” QUARK’S BAR, DEEP SPACE 9
(STARDATE 48973.2)
It’s an odd experience to look back over the centuries
of my life. Every time my symbiont gets a new host, it’s
discombobulating. Remembering a life you lived, but
also didn’t. Remembering entirely different genders, and
ages, lives varied in every way imaginable.
But all those wild variations of life are what make it beau-
tiful. I can’t wait to see who I’m going to be next. Aren’t
you curious who you’ll be in a year? What? No, I know it’s
my turn. Shh, I’m thinking.
try to evacuate all inhabitable planets in the region.
This monumental undertaking would ultimately not be
enough to save everyone and those who were saved
became scattered across the Beta Quadrant, splintering
the heart of the Romulan Star Empire. The supernova
would also be the inciting event that caused both Spock
and a ship called the Narada to be sent back in time,
creating an entirely new temporal branch known as the
Kelvin Timeline.
The tail end of the century saw rapid technological
advancements in the areas of automation and propul-
sion systems. The experimental protowarp drive allowed
starships to reach transwarp speeds, but required the
power of a small star to use and was only sustainable for
short bursts and wasn’t implemented on many ships as
the frames had to be small in scale.
At about the same time, the introduction of the Texas-
class starships showed the benefits and drawbacks
of fully automated, crewless ships. While the concept
worked well on paper, when implemented, the artificial-
ly intelligent ships proved challenging to control and
were slow to adapt to challenges a crewed ship could
respond to immediately.
The failure of the Texas class was the first of many
problems automation brought to Starfleet and the
Federation. This problem was capitalized on by the Zhat
Vash, a secret Romulan cult that thought artificial intel-
ligence would lead to invasion from extradimensional
technological beings. The scheming group infiltrated
the Mars shipyards and reprogrammed the synthetic
workers to strike out against their creators, destroying
the bases on the planet and the orbiting ship-building
facilities. This strike led to the United Federation of
Planets banning all forms of synthetic life-forms and
artificial intelligences until they could determine what
caused the uprising.
: . 24th Century
Campaigns
Diplomatic missions are commonplace during this
century as species begin to spread out among the
quadrants. These types of missions become even
more important in the latter half of the century when
the Dominion and Klingon wars made finding allies a
top priority.
This century also provides amazing backgrounds for
a war-focused campaign. With nearly the entire Orion
Spur taking part in the Dominion War, the number of
different mission types a campaign could have during
these few years is vast. From battles to subterfuge, each
mission could have a slightly different feel and give dif-
ferent members of the crew a chance to shine.
 Run this era
if the group:
§ Enjoys diplomatic missions.
§ Wants to participate in quadrant-spanning wars.
§ Likes developing new technology.
§ Is interested in recruiting new people to a cause.
§ Likes planning for large-scale tactical events.
A STAR TREK PRIMER
37
2400 TO 2499: EXPANDING INTO
THE UNKNOWN
THE 25TH CENTURY BEGAN WITH SEVERAL ENCOUN-
ters with what was left of the Borg. While the Romulan
Star Empire and Starfleet worked together on restoring
ex-Borg (xBs) to their former selves and integrating
them into society, both factions used their teams at the
captured Borg Cube known as the Artifact to analyze the
Borg’s technology and weapons. This research led to a
new era of weapon systems and defensive design.
: . VARIATIONS MAKE
LIFE BEAUTIFUL
As the Sol system starships gathered around
Spacedock, the Borg unleashed its desperate final plan.
Manipulating Changelings who were angry with the
Federation, the Borg Queen used the fleet’s transporters
to modify the DNA of its officers, allowing for a form of
biological assimilation. With control of the fleet, the new
Borg severely damaged Spacedock and Earth. Only with
the heroic efforts of Jean-Luc Picard and his former crew
was the Borg Queen defeated and the assimilation of the
Starfleet officers broken.
PERSONAL LOG, WARRANT OFFICER (IN TRAINING)
ZERO (STARDATE 61409)
I have observed my crewmates with such curiosity. Their
lives, their very existence, is so different from mine. And
yet I care about them so deeply, and I’ve found that we’re
stronger for our differences. I don’t know what it’s like to
have a physical body. To feel. I don’t know what it’s like
to have a gender, though corporeal beings can certainly
be agender as well. Perhaps I should seek some out; I’m
sure our discussions would be fascinating!
I long to know what it’s like to experience the universe
more fully than I can now. Perhaps one day…but then,
perhaps my friends also wonder what it would be like to
experience the universe as a Medusan.
We have so much we can learn from each other. It’s really
quite beautiful when you think about it.
The Romulan Star Empire dissolved into full-blown civil
war as numerous insurgent groups tried to overthrow
the Tal Shiar. When the dust from the war settled, a
united faction of Remans and Romulans created the
Romulan Republic and used New Romulus as their
center of power.
As the century progressed, the Gamma and Delta
Quadrants became more accessible. These new rela-
tionships, while beneficial to most involved, continued
to have rough patches and battles among the species
involved. The exchanges of culture and technology
among the quadrants led to a time of rapid growth and a
renaissance for those who chose to partake.
: . 25TH CENTURY
CAMPAIGNS
Campaigns in this century are free to go in virtually any
direction, given there is little as yet established canon-
ically about this period of time. Groups could focus on
engineering advances developed due to the study of
Borg technologies, the repercussions from the collapse
of the Romulan Empire and the demise of the Borg, or
the ongoing challenges of increased pirate activity along
the borders.
 Run this era
if the group:
This era is also a perfect opportunity for Starfleet to focus
once more on expanding knowledge by beginning a dy-
namic new program of deep-space multi-year missions.
§ Enjoys strategic missions.
§ Is interested in reverse engineering advanced
technology.
§ Enjoys engaging with new civilizations.
§ Doesn’t want to be too hampered by canon events.
38
CHAPTER 1
THOMAS MARRONE
2500 AND BEYOND: THE FAR FUTURE
LITTLE IS KNOWN ABOUT THESE FUTURE CENTURIES
as the reverberations from the Temporal Cold War made
casual observation challenging. With innumerable
paradoxes and timelines created by the parties involved,
discerning which events occurred in which timeline is
something many struggle with daily.
: . A CORE TRUTH
: . The 26th Century:
Temporal cold war
A temporally-sensitive species known as the Sphere
Builders learned of their imminent defeat by an alli-
ance led by Starfleet and instigated a war that spanned
across time and space. The war involved nearly a dozen
species, each of which used time to try to thwart future
events. It is postulated that the Temporal Cold War is
still happening, and will always happen, even though the
Temporal Accord put an end to the war.
PERSONAL LOG, ENSIGN ADIRA TAL
(STARDATE 865660)
I don’t think there’s anything in the universe better than
getting to live as your true, authentic self. If anything
comes close, it’s instantaneous acceptance from those
you love, whose feelings for you don’t change even if
their perception of you does.
Of course, Starfleet can’t change the entire Galaxy, and
there are still places where bigotry and regressive ideas
about gender stifle those who live there. Even Earth’s
own history is filled with instances of that kind of hatred.
Imagine being locked into something, anything, from the
moment of your birth just based on what somebody else
decided you should be, rather than getting to discover
for yourself who you are. Imagine your loved ones shun-
ning you for it.
I don’t think there’s anything in any universe that could
be worse.
: . The 31st and 32nd
Centuries
In the 31st century, a major event known as The Burn
occurred, which distorted the spiral crystalline structure
of almost all dilithium throughout the Galaxy, making
the element unable to regulate the matter-antimatter
reactions in warp cores. Nearly seventy-five percent of
Starfleet’s vessels are destroyed or lost.
The Burn was the inciting event that led to the fracturing
of the Federation as, in its wake, many polities chose to
protect themselves and what dilithium they had. Though
sparse, the dilithium unaffected by The Burn became
a highly valued commodity and entire organizations,
like the Emerald Chain, tried to collect and manage the
resource to turn a profit.
species the Federation dubbed the 10-C had created the
device to power a distortion field around their new home-
world. Putting the values of the Federation at the fore-
front, Starfleet found the 10-C and communicated with
them, convincing them of the damage their device was
doing to the Galaxy. Though fearful of the future, the 10-C
trusted the Federation and powered down their device.
: . FAR FUTURE CAMPAIGNS
Campaigns set in the far future are free to go in whatever
direction you please, given the era's canon is still being
written. Make your own mark on the era with your group.
When the U.S.S. Discovery transported to the 32nd cen-
tury, its crew reunited several former Federation cultures
with Starfleet in an attempt to rekindle the flame that
was the Federation. These actions were especially effec-
tive after Starfleet discovered the cause of The Burn and
exonerated all species of wrongdoing.
Shortly after the cause of The Burn was discovered, the
Galaxy was again put in danger when a gravitational
anomaly began teleporting throughout the Orion Spur.
Eventually called the Dark Matter Anomaly (DMA),
the anomaly was caused by a device many considered
a weapon. Starfleet pieced together that the DMA was
a mining device that was harvesting boronite. An alien
 Run this era
if the group:
§ Enjoys strategic missions.
§ Is interested in reverse engineering advanced
technology.
§ Enjoys engaging with new polities.
§ Doesn’t want to be hampered by canon events.
A STAR TREK PRIMER
39
CHAPTER 2
STARFLEET
2.1 Starfleet's Mandate 42
2.2 The Prime Directive 45
2.3 Starfleet Academy 48
2.4 Duty Assignments 51
2.5 Mission Types 54
2.6 Away Teams 58
ALEXEY CHERNIK
41
: . CHAPTER 2.1
STARFLEET'S MANDATE
“The first duty of every Starfleet officer is to the
truth. Whether it’s scientific truth, or historical
truth, or personal truth. It is the guiding principle
upon which Starfleet is based.
- Captain Jean-Luc Picard
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
ENSIGN
LANIYAR TENNAN
I’m Laniyar Tennan,
Starfleet ensign
assigned to the
U.S.S. Challenger as
communications officer.
Commander th’Raviq,
our executive officer,
encouraged me to tell
you all about Starfleet,
the Federation’s
primary exploratory and
defensive organization.
Having just graduated
from the Academy, I’m
eager to tell you all
about it.
FROM ITS EARLIEST DAYS,
Starfleet’s mission has always been one
of peace—visiting strange new worlds
and seeking out new life and new civili-
zations. However, even the Federation
members that have not suffered from
centuries of war, as Earth has, know
the importance of being able to defend
oneself. As a result, Starfleet ships carry
enough weaponry to keep themselves
safe, and they also extend this protec-
tion to their member worlds, Federation
civilian ships, and anyone else in need.
This has led to Starfleet’s twofold dedi-
cation to both exploration and defense.
Though Starfleet Headquarters is
located on Earth, in San Francisco,
Starfleet maintains facilities throughout
the Federation, from planetary bases to
deep space stations to massive starbas-
es. Starfleet Command is the depart-
ment overseeing the organization as a
whole, assisted by many subordinate
departments. Starfleet’s motto is “Ad
astra per aspera,” which is Latin for “To
the stars through hardship.”
: . Exploring the
Final Frontier
The Exploratory Division is the heart of
Starfleet, and treated as nearly sacred to
those who want to follow in the pio-
neering footsteps of Jonathan Archer,
Philippa Georgiou, and Christopher Pike.
 Enlisting in Other Organizations
Joining Starfleet can be an easy decision
for many citizens of the Federation, but
why might citizens of other nearby civi-
lizations join Starfleet or even their own
civilizations’ equivalent?
A young Klingon may join the Klingon
Defense Force for many reasons, the
foremost being the quest to find glory in
one way or another—making a name for
themselves amongst their peers, be it in
combat, or perhaps in scientific endeav-
ors. Klingons may also feel the need to
set themselves apart from others around
them, and the opportunities the KDF
provides can do that in a short amount
of time. There is no greater glory than
serving with honor to the entire Empire
rather than just yourself or your House.
Romulan citizens may join for reasons
similar to Starfleet, to defend their home,
to explore new worlds and seek out the
resources that will allow the Empire to
flourish, and in some cases, to ensure
that the Empire and its culture are not
subsumed into the Federation or other
nearby civilizations.
Other civilizations such as the Ferengi
may wish to expand capitalism and
economic opportunities for a personal
business idea they may have or to bring
more wealth and capital to the Alliance.
Cardassians may wish to join their navy
to show a different face of their species
to the rest of the Galaxy. The possibili-
ties are endless.
42 CHAPTER 2
: . To be among
the stars
CAPTAIN BEATRICE WEN, U.S.S. TORONTO
Space and exploration runs deep in my family. I can
trace our roots back to the earliest days of space flight.
I knew as a little girl that I wanted to see what was out
there and I wondered who I might meet. It filled my heart
with joy when I was accepted into Starfleet Academy.
I knew I wanted to explore and be a part of something
exceptional.
I have seen wonders that defy imagination and I know
there is so much more to see and do. Starfleet allows me
to see the universe in ways I never dreamed of; every day
is an adventure and a chance to further our knowledge
of the universe around us. I have developed bonds with
my crew, who have become more than shipmates: they
are family. The thought that we can all work together to
do something amazing is breath-taking.
There will be challenging days ahead and even days
that may break my heart, but knowing that I am out here
making a difference makes it worthwhile to put on the
uniform and represent the best Starfleet has to offer. I
wouldn’t trade it for all the latinum in the Galaxy.
This division coordinates all the stellar mapping, hazard
plotting, deep space expeditions, planetary surveys, and
any other kind of exploratory mission the Federation
requires.
Working closely with the Exploratory Division
are Starfleet Science and Starfleet Research &
Development. These departments work to understand
the discoveries made by Starfleet’s explorers and use
that knowledge in a beneficial way. Starfleet R&D’s
projects are sometimes handed off to other depart-
ments, such as Starfleet Advanced Technologies, the
Starfleet Corps of Engineers, and the Warp Technologies
Development Group.
Civilian organizations on many member worlds con-
tinue to perform research similar to that conducted by
Starfleet, but Starfleet’s ships, personnel, and exper-
tise grant it a great advantage in conducting this work.
Starfleet ships can travel farther and faster, are equipped
with cutting-edge sensor suites, and can defend them-
selves against hazards better than nearly any civilian
ships. Indeed, this is why civilian researchers often
 Starfleet Across
the Eras
Depending on a given story’s era of play, Starfleet’s pres-
ence and “character” may have a different feel and level
of influence on the crew.
In its early years, before the founding of the Federation,
it operated as a part of the United Earth Space Probe
Agency (UESPA), though, over time, Starfleet became
its own fully-integrated multi-cultural organization.
Adventures set in the 22nd century may experience a
less-unified Starfleet, still working out rules and regu-
lations, not prone to interfering with a crew’s missions,
and not yet held to a Prime Directive (and even after its
adoption, still not applying it consistently).
In the early-to-mid 23rd century, Starfleet’s organi-
zation and rules were well-established, but the com-
bination of ships traveling farther from home and the
limited network of subspace relays meant vessels were
commonly out of convenient contact with Starfleet
Command. This was the classic era of the “final
frontier,” when captains were typically left to their own
discretion in most matters.
In the 24th century, Starfleet is frequently a constant
presence. Even ships exploring outside Federation
space are often capable of direct contact with the near-
est admiral, though message lag may impose a delay of
a few hours. The Admiralty often makes demands of a
crew on a mission, and these demands can be at odds
with the way the crew thinks the assignment would best
be conducted.
In the 32nd century, Starfleet is in disarray, suffering
(and then recovering) from The Burn, an event which
destroyed most of the fleet. Travel is limited due to a
shortage of dilithium and ships, and the Federation con-
sists of only 38 member worlds. Starfleet suffers from
near-constant emergencies in its attempts to hold the
Federation together, and Commander-in-Chief Charles
Vance needs all the help he can get.
request Starfleet aid, whether in the form of a formal
mission to travel to a place of interest and help them
conduct research, or a more self-directed short-to-long
term civilian posting aboard a starship or starbase that
allows researchers to use Starfleet resources while the
crew goes about their regular assignments.
STARFLEET
43
: . Defending Those in
Need
Starfleet’s secondary function is to defend the
Federation and its individual member worlds from both
enemy aggression and natural disasters. Although every
Federation member maintains some kind of planetary
defense force to protect their individual star systems,
Starfleet vessels regularly patrol the space lanes in
between to ensure free and open passage.
Starfleet’s exploratory efforts also take it far beyond the
boundaries of the Federation and into potentially hostile sit-
uations. Because starships venture into the unknown, they
are equipped not only with sophisticated sensor systems
and probes, but with powerful defensive systems. Starships
patrol along the Klingon and Romulan neutral zones, and in
the past have been called upon to investigate the sudden
disappearance of Federation colonies, protect Starfleet
outposts, defend against hostile alien probes, and serve
as peacekeepers between warring alien governments.
Despite the tremendous destructive power a starship
can bring to bear, Starfleet is firmly dedicated to peace-
ful resolution whenever possible. Weapons are tools
of last resort. Starfleet captains do not start wars, and
should never “shoot first and ask questions later.”
: . Organization
The ultimate authority over Starfleet rests with the
Federation Council and the President of the United
Federation of Planets. Both have the power to direct
Starfleet to undertake specific missions—a planetary
evacuation, for example—though this is rarely used.
 Section 31
Since perhaps the founding of Starfleet, a secret
intelligence organization has apparently operated from
the shadows. Section 31’s self-assigned mission is to
protect the Federation by performing tasks they see as
necessary but which Starfleet and the Federation as
a whole would not allow, including deception, Prime
Directive violations, assassination, and even genocide.
Few people outside Section 31 know of its existence, as
its operatives take great care to conceal their operations
and limit revealing themselves to others. However, it is
apparent that some in the upper echelons of Starfleet
are aware of Section 31’s existence, but take no actions
against the organization because it benefits them or
Starfleet to leave it in place.
44 CHAPTER 2
 Division 14
Because Starfleet duty exposes personnel to all manner
of strange environments, species, pathogens, radiations,
and technologies, it maintains an entire division devoted
to treating unusual injuries and illnesses. Division 14’s
base of operations is a spa on Endicronimas V known
as “the Farm.” Patients are often brought to the Farm by
the spa’s transport vessel, U.S.S. Osler. This division’s
highly-skilled staff has aided in the recovery of hundreds
of officers, and their discoveries regularly advance
Federation medical knowledge.
The next level of authority is the Starfleet Commander-
in-Chief, who is responsible for Starfleet as a whole. The
CIC sets the policies and initiatives for the entire organ-
ization, keeping in mind Federation needs and priorities
and Starfleet’s mission statement and regulations. They
receive a daily briefing on Starfleet’s overall disposi-
tion, as well as any matters that may rise to their level
of attention. Examples might include hostilities along
the Romulan border or intelligence reports concerning
infighting within the Klingon Empire. They frequently
consult with admirals throughout the service. Starfleet
monitors all fleet activities through Starfleet Operations,
which maintains the present position and disposition
of every starship and starbase at the Fleet Operations
Center on Earth.
Fleet admirals make up the next level in the chain of
command. As their title indicates, fleet admirals are
responsible for an entire fleet of starships (and starbas-
es). Typically, this comprises several sectors, such as
the region of space along the Cardassian border. Their
responsibilities include overseeing and directing all
the ships within their respective fleets and serving as
the point of contact between individual admirals and
Starfleet Command.
Admirals command more than one ship. They are typi-
cally posted to a starbase (though not always) and com-
mand all the Starfleet vessels in their area of responsi-
bility, most often a specific sector. They are the officers
most frequently in contact with a starship’s captain, with
a ship’s orders and mission assignments coming directly
from them.
: . CHAPTER 2.2
THE PRIME DIRECTIVE
“A star captain’s most solemn oath is
that he will give his life, even his entire crew,
rather than violate the Prime Directive.
- Captain James T. Kirk
THE MOST FAMILIAR APPLICATION OF
the Prime Directive involves
non-warp-capable cultures, as these
are the cases where interference could
happen most easily and with dramatic
consequences. Even introducing a
world with the knowledge that “aliens”
exist—perhaps even accidentally—
could transform a planet’s society over-
night, with unpredictable results.
crew and their ship. Unfortunately, up-
holding it is not always easy, and often
involves making tough decisions. Should
the crew intervene to save a primitive
population even though the Prime
Directive forbids it? If an allied Klingon
ship asks a Starfleet crew for help
against another Klingon faction, should
the player characters get involved? If
crewmembers themselves get into legal
trouble on a developing world, do other
characters dare bend the rules to get
them out of it?
The fundamental principles of the
Prime Directive existed long before the
doctrine itself. Its roots can be seen in
the Vulcan practice of avoiding contact
with primitive, pre-warp societies. Had
Zefram Cochrane failed to make his
historic, first faster-than-light trip in the
Phoenix, the Vulcan survey vessel would
have passed Earth by as too primitive,
and first contact would not have oc-
curred. Later, early Starfleet crews real-
ized the need for some kind of doctrine
establishing what Humans should and
should not do while exploring space.
The Prime Directive is not just a rule, it
is the guiding philosophy of Starfleet.
Upholding it takes priority over the lives
of Starfleet personnel, even an entire
Although Starfleet captains are often in
the spotlight for possible Prime Directive
violations, every crewmember must
do their part to obey the directive. The
captain won’t be the only one to suffer
scrutiny from Starfleet Command if an
officer reveals “miraculous” capabilities
to a primitive culture. Loss of reputation
is possible, as well as demotion, or even,
in extreme cases, court martial and
possible imprisonment. Complicating
this, of course, is the fact that although
every Starfleet officer has sworn a vow
to uphold the Prime Directive, not every
officer has the same opinions about the
directive or how to interpret it.
ENSIGN
LANIYAR TENNAN
Starfleet’s General
Order One, also known
as the Prime Directive,
prohibits personnel
from interfering in
the affairs and natural
development of other
cultures—even if such
changes are well-
intentioned. Countless
missions have had
Prime Directive
implications, and it’s
likely it’ll come up in
your travels as well.
 Starfleet General Order One
§ No identification of self or mission.
§ No interference with the social, cultural, or technological development of said planet.
§ No reference to space, other worlds, or advanced civilizations.
STARFLEET
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
45
JENS LINDFORS
: . Composing the
music of my life
PERSONAL LOG, JAN’ESSA, CULTURAL LIAISON
FOR THE MINRAI
I worried for many years that I may never find my true self
here on my world, Danib 4. However, as I began traveling
across the Alpha Quadrant, I began to see through differ-
ent eyes and things started to become much clearer.
There is so much I have yet to encounter and so many
new individuals I can learn from. In my culture, we
express ourselves through song, the Suvi. By meeting
members of the galactic Federation, I am learning and
experiencing a symphony of new songs from so many
who are different from me. I am singing in languages I
never knew existed, and composing who I am in ways I
never knew I could express. I am so happy that almost
every species can express themselves in the common
languages of love and music.
There are so many people out there and as I continue
on my journey, I am hopeful I will find someone to sing
alongside me, my Qi-ro. I have fallen in love with Vulcans,
Andorians, and more. Doing so has created something
I am excited to develop as a symphony to present to my
home world’s concert series, the Qi-ros, the many as one.
The diversity of what I have been exposed to in the
Federation is something I will cherish forever, even
should my culture never join.
46 CHAPTER 2
Keep in mind that not only do many other spacefaring
cultures not have such a noninterference directive,
some of them actively work to interfere with other
cultures. Indeed, a Starfleet crew might have to involve
themselves to prevent interference from happening, or
repair it when it already has.
: . Prohibited Activities
and Exceptions
Contrary to popular belief, application of the Prime
Directive is not based solely on warp capabilities.
Starfleet Command may, after initial survey missions, de-
termine that a culture possesses significantly advanced
technologies to warrant first contact. Similarly, if a
civilization contacts the Federation first, then the Prime
Directive applies less strictly than it would for a newly
discovered world.
Specifically, General Order One prohibits a wide range
of actions which constitute “interference.” Do not
reveal the existence of other inhabited planets or other
civilizations. Do not provide knowledge of undiscovered
technologies or science. Take no actions that could
generally affect a civilization’s overall development. Do
not get involved in the internal affairs of another society,
such as backing one group over another. These prohibi-
tions also include actions that have presented profound
moral challenges for both captains and crew—helping a
society escape the consequences of their own actions;
saving a civilization from a natural disaster; and subvert-
ing or avoiding the application of a society’s laws.
Starfleet gives commanding officers wide leeway
regarding whether and how the Prime Directive applies.
In the early years of Starfleet, captains tended to err on
the side of intervention, interpreting the Prime Directive
to only apply to living, growing, developing civilizations;
they interfered in situations where the society fell into
a state of arrested development, had been somehow
enslaved, or faced mortal danger.
interference. These exceptions include, but are not lim-
ited to: the society already knows about the Federation;
they communicate with or attack a Federation vessel;
they send a planetary distress signal to any and all
spacefaring societies; the Federation is in diplomatic
discussions with the society; the civilization was previ-
ously contaminated by Federation citizens or non-Fed-
eration actors (such as the Klingons or Romulans);
compliance with valid orders from Starfleet Command.
Officers have taken the directive as an absolute, and
are willing to watch whole societies perish from natural
or evolutionary causes rather than interfere. The truth
is, the application of the Prime Directive exists along a
continuum depending on many factors. Is the planet a
Federation colony? Has there been prior contamination
by Federation citizens or Klingon agents? Is the planet in
negotiations with the Federation? Is it possible to inter-
vene without revealing the existence of other spacefar-
ing civilizations?
Over the course of a given officer’s career in Starfleet,
they will likely encounter many other exceptions to the
Prime Directive (and possibly create a few).
Starfleet recognizes many exceptions to the Prime
Directive. These do not revoke the Prime Directive in
its entirety, however. If warranted, starship crews are
expected to intervene in the least intrusive way possible
when the situation calls for it. For example, if required to
repair a prior cultural contamination, a crew is expect-
ed to do so in a way that does not lead to even greater
: . The Temporal Prime
Directive
This related directive applies to Starfleet personnel
who either accidentally or intentionally find themselves
time-traveling. It specifically prohibits officers from
interfering with past events that could affect the future
(including the officers’ present time period). This order
forbids officers from giving people in the past any infor-
mation regarding future events. Officers must also mini-
mize the use of advanced technology to avoid revealing
such to witnesses from the past.
THE PRIME DIRECTIVE IN PLAY
THE PRIME DIRECTIVE IS NOT MEANT TO TRIP PLAY-
ers up, or prevent them from doing fun things; instead, it
is a means to increase drama and introduce philosoph-
ical considerations into a story. There is often a lot of
room for interpretation of whether the Prime Directive
should apply in a given situation, and players should feel
free to discuss as a group whether they think it does and
what they should do about it.
In the end, despite Starfleet’s great respect for the
Prime Directive, and strict demands that it be adhered
to, crewmembers must ask themselves how it should
shape their personal actions. Since the early days of
Starfleet, these kinds of difficult decisions have obliged
command crews to debate how best to balance com-
peting ethical priorities. There is no question the Prime
Directive prevents Starfleet from getting involved in sit-
uations where it can help. However, all personnel must
consider the unintended consequences of meddling in
the affairs of a civilization not yet ready to learn they are
not alone in the universe.
Such moral quandaries are the bread and butter of Star
Trek. How will a crew react when they discover a world
where capital punishment is the law, and their captain
is to be executed for a seemingly minor infraction? Can
they passively watch a primitive culture be destroyed
by a supernova? Do they allow a species to pursue a
dangerous political system that oppresses its citizens?
Will they sit by and allow Romulan agents to arm one
primitive faction against another?
STARFLEET
47
: . CHAPTER 2.3
STARFLEET ACADEMY
“I am a graduate of Starfleet Academy;
I know many things.
- Worf
STARFLEET ACADEMY IS WHERE THE
fleet trains its officers, preparing them
for the responsibility of crewing star-
ships and bases of all types. The main
campus is on Earth, in San Francisco,
though annexes and training campus-
es are located on Beta Aquilae II, Beta
Ursae Minor II, Relva VII, Psi Upsilon III,
and other locations within Federation
space. The Academy’s motto is “Ex
astris scientia,” which is Latin for, “From
the stars, knowledge.”
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
ENSIGN
LANIYAR TENNAN
Let’s now turn our
attention to one of
the premier centers
of study in the Alpha
and Beta Quadrants:
Starfleet Academy,
and what’s involved
in getting in,
graduating, and
experiencing life as
a cadet.
: . Fostering Life-
Long Learning
The Commandant of Starfleet Academy
runs a rigorous academic course, com-
posed of advanced educational tracks
that can take from four to eight years
to complete, and possibly resulting in
a graduate holding several degrees in
a variety of majors. While the Academy
includes an incredible variety of study
topics—advanced theoretical physics,
astrophysics, engineering, exo-archae-
ology, exobiology, probability mechan-
ics, sociolinguistics, and zoology, to
name a few—all cadets must meet
certain requirements.
Attending the Academy starts with a
candidate’s initial application, and con-
tinues through a preparatory program,
entrance exams, psychological tests,
selection committees, a challenging
curriculum, a training cruise, and then
graduation and placement to the of-
ficer’s first posting. Starfleet Academy’s
complete program has been designed
to attract and foster the curious and the
brave—the kind of beings who reach out
toward the unknown; the sort of officers
who define Starfleet.
Cadets are expected to have an ex-
haustive understanding of Starfleet’s
General Orders and regulations, as well
as a firm comprehension of Federation
law. They must maintain a cross-disci-
plinary study in the basics of command,
science, navigation, engineering,
security, and medicine, regardless of
their own specialty. The curriculum is
deliberately broad so graduates may
temporarily stand in for any department
on a ship or station, if needed.
Non-Federation citizens are welcome
to apply to the Academy, though they
must have a letter of recommendation
submitted by a command-level officer.
Genetically augmented individuals are,
with few exceptions, forbidden from
joining Starfleet.
Most importantly, cadets are expect-
ed to nurture a passion for life-long
learning. Students learn how to access
the proper information stores from
Federation sources and formulate ef-
fective lines of inquiry at any time, even
under severe stress.
48 CHAPTER 2
 Non-Academy Crew
Though most crew members graduated from Starfleet
Academy, this is not true of everyone. Civilians often
fill needed roles on a ship or station, whether they are
visiting specialists, officers’ family members, or travelers
who were encountered (or rescued) on a mission.
In some cases, civilians are granted an official com-
mission; this most commonly happens to officers who
already received extensive training elsewhere, such as
medical doctors or members of another government’s
military force. This sort of commission usually requires
a brief stint at the Academy, which includes accelerated
training on Starfleet protocols and expectations. Doctor
Leonard McCoy is an example of this sort of officer.
A dedicated program also exists for training enlisted
personnel at the Starfleet Technical Services Academy,
headquartered on Mars. Though these non-commis-
sioned officers are outranked by any Starfleet Academy
graduate—even ensigns—many in the enlisted ranks
bring decades of real-world experience with them, and a
wise officer makes use of their expertise and advice.
Chapter 4 provides several options for character crea-
tion that do not require the character to attend Starfleet
Academy.
In order to promote practicality over the purely theoret-
ical, students are consistently exposed to novel experi-
ences. This is done through bridge simulators, holodeck
scenarios, and hands-on missions. The real-world mis-
sions are considered especially important because they
allow for random variations to enter the scenario.
: . The Academy
Experience: Making
Connections
The Federation ethos has always been one of commu-
nication and understanding, building bridges of trust
and mutual admiration with disparate, sometimes even
hostile, cultures. Effective team-building and the Vulcan
tenet of IDIC—respect for infinite diversity in infinite
combinations—is the center around which the Starfleet
Academy curriculum was structured.
In brief, the Academy experience is focused around the
idea of building cooperation among teammates. The
more disparate the individuals, the harder the cadets
are expected to work at finding connections with their
fellows and minimizing differences.
This may manifest differently from individual to individu-
al. A person may be socially anxious and have very few
overt friends, but their connection to their work may be
where their passions shine. The Academy works hard
to push and even exceed the limits of their students
through shared experiences. A commander, talking with
their crew, may find connections through Academy ex-
periences. For example, how did they handle the difficult
experience of the Kobayashi Maru test?
: . Hands-on, Cutting-
Edge Research
A commonly overlooked detail is that Starfleet Academy
is, by design, a research university. It is staffed by leading
experts in their fields who are committed to performing
cutting-edge research while also training the officers of
tomorrow. These professors have access to both public
and sensitive research and invite students to learn from
it and to also become fresh eyes on related projects. It is
not unusual for a student to have co-published a discov-
ery or insight in their field before graduation.
New graduates serve as pipelines for new research and
discoveries to migrate onto vessels in the field. While all
of their work is available in Starfleet databases, gradu-
ates are encouraged to bring it to the attention of others
when appropriate. This level of individual investment has
been shown to be invaluable in the right circumstances,
whether demonstrating new scanning techniques or
being able to identify subspace particles only recently
isolated by Starfleet.
STARFLEET
49
: . My dreams are
my own
PERSONAL LOG ENTRY, ENSIGN MICHELLE CULLEN,
STARBASE 17
The reaches of space have never been more accessi-
ble than they are now to me. I was born different and
never once did it ever stop me from wanting to explore
beyond the small Federation colony. I have a condition
which can affect me due to my environmental sensitives
and isolate me from ever leaving the protected biomes
of my homeworld.
I joined the Academy and I said goodbye to my partner
and went forward with my head held high and never like
I was anything other than my abilities and what I could
do. My determination and adaptability made me special
in ways that some of my classmates weren’t, and yet we
were all the same in our goal, explore what was among
the stars. Never once was I looked at as weak or sickly.
I was seen as another student who was eager to learn,
to do the greater good and carve out their own legacy. It
was such a refreshing change to be seen as pure poten-
tial rather than simply what obstacle was to be over-
come next. My friends encouraged me when I needed
it and let me conquer what I needed to when I need to
prove something to myself and not anyone else.
I have never felt limited in what I could accomplish and
now that I am among the very birthplace of creation, I am
free of all barriers and free to blaze my own path in history.
: . Graduation
Not every person who successfully applies to Starfleet
will be able to keep up with its aggressive pace. Many
of those who do pass the initial exams drop out in
their first year. There is no shame or blame attached to
dropping out. Those who are still committed to serving
are channeled into the Starfleet Technical Services
Academy on Mars. Extensive evidence shows many of
these students require and thrive in an experiential, not
academic, environment, and it is not unusual to see ship-
board promotion and, for dedicated enlisted personnel,
a commission. Such a commission requires passing the
necessary examinations to attend Academy courses, but
by this point many enlisted personnel find it an achieva-
ble challenge simply due to their past experiences.
50 CHAPTER 2
For those who make it through the full course of
Starfleet Academy, the promise of graduation is a cadet
will receive an officer’s commission and assignment to
duty. A few potential paths are open to graduates.
First, as part of the preparation for graduation, a cadet
is asked to examine and produce a list of postings they
would prefer. They must also provide a reason for their
request. Postings available to students are ones not
already reserved for those of higher rank seeking a
transfer, though at least one slot is usually set aside on
any ship simply as a courtesy to the Academy.
Then, the cadet is then asked to rank the importance of
either research in their specialty or exploration. Their
previous experiences are then compared to others to
help determine the final state of their commission.
These two choices in combination help the Academy
find a posting where the graduate will have the oppor-
tunity to excel. Whether it is a posting on a starship they
are passionate about, a place where they can research
something that they love, or opening up an opportunity
for the thrill of adventure, Starfleet Academy is careful
about taking these talented individuals and inserting
them into positions that can expand their boundaries
while filling an important need in the fleet.
It is important to note this traditional system can be
circumvented in two ways. First, a captain of a vessel
may specifically request a graduating cadet. It might
be someone with much-needed expertise or who has
published about a useful subject. Second, a petition can
be made through the Federation Council. The Vulcan
Science Academy has been known to do this from time
to time with certain promising cadets. Naturally, the
student has some say in the matter, but if someone has
requested a student to a post, this is generally seen as
potential for quicker advancement.
After graduation, Starfleet consistently maintains oppor-
tunities for rotation between any of the cadet’s original
career paths. An active alumni database enables officers
whose needs may change as they age to select a post-
ing that might be more appropriate. Channels remain
open so officers can contact previous instructors from
their tenure, to allow quicker access to research that
might not otherwise be available. In return, the Academy
receives logs and data from starships that allow them to
further their own projects and curriculum.
: . CHAPTER 2.4
DUTY ASSIGNMENTS
“They always tell you not to get too attached
to your ship, but how could you not?
- Ensign D’Vana Tendi
AN ACADEMY GRADUATE’S ASSIGN-
ment within Starfleet depends on a
variety of factors: their course of study
at the Academy, the results of numerous
tests, the availability of positions within
available ships and starbases, and the
service’s needs at the time.
Upon graduation from the Academy,
Starfleet Command assigns an officer to
the appropriate division based on their
career track—Command, Science, or
Operations. If you graduate as a xenobi-
ologist, you’re assigned to the Science
division. If you’re a pilot, you’re assigned
as a conn officer in the Command divi-
sion. Starfleet Command works diligent-
ly to ensure all cadets receive the train-
ing they desire (and for which they’re
qualified), in order to ensure high levels
of self-fulfillment, self-actualization, and
job satisfaction. This results in highly
trained and highly motivated crews.
Starship assignments are the most
coveted positions for new graduates,
but cadets must remember that this is
not the only type of job for an officer.
Starbases, science outposts, deep
space stations, dry docks, and ground
facilities need personnel too. Most new
graduates learn on smaller vessels—like
the Nova class, Oberth class, or Intrepid
class—or subordinate positions like
third engineer aboard a Sovereign-class
starship. Almost as often, new ensigns
find themselves posted as a transporter
operator on a starbase, or engineer of
an ecological testing base on a frozen
outpost. As a new graduate, landing a
coveted assignment on a ship-of-the-
line usually requires a solid Academy
service record, a letter of recommenda-
tion, or a rare and valuable ability.
ENSIGN
LANIYAR TENNAN
Now that you know
a bit more about
Starfleet, the Prime
Directive, and
the Academy life,
let’s talk about the
practicalities of
serving in Starfleet
by discussing
duty assignments,
missions, and, most
importantly, your
quarters!
When it comes to first duty assignments,
Starfleet asks the graduate what they
want to do. Starfleet Command takes
these requests seriously, and if an open-
ing is available for this preferred role, the
officer is assigned to the starship and
position of their choice. Not everyone
can be chief engineer of a Galaxy-class
starship, however. If a graduate cannot
get the assignment of their choice,
Starfleet Command posts them where
their demonstrated skills are most need-
ed: an engineering position on the Titan
might not be available, but there might
be one open aboard an Akira-class star-
ship. The needs of the service come first,
so officers must go where they are needed.
Officers are sometimes assigned to
a temporary position for a special,
one-time mission. A starship may need
a particular specialist to accomplish
a job; for example, a science officer
returning to a specific planet who has
experience with the local flora and
fauna. Or an expert in multi-dimensional
physics assigned to study an unusu-
al quasar. Starfleet Command might
choose an officer who previously stud-
ied a civilization during an earlier mis-
sion to send back and assist with first
contact. Once the mission is complete,
the temporary officer typically returns
to their original assignment—though
sometimes a temporary posting can be-
come permanent at the request of the
commanding officer or crewmember.
STARFLEET
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
51
Keep in mind that a given ship’s “mission” can mean
several things. At the highest level, there’s the crew’s
ongoing mission to seek out new life and new civiliza-
tions—the basic Starfleet mission statement. Below
this is the crew’s specific, long-term, mission, which is
typically broad. “Catalog all gaseous anomalies in sector
21505.” “Patrol the Romulan Neutral Zone.” “Survey all
the star systems in the Talos star group.” In addition,
before embarking on an assignment, every starship cap-
tain receives a command packet with a list of specific
missions to be addressed at specific times.
These individual missions are based on the ship’s pro-
jected course and Starfleet’s needs—provide medical
exams to the crew at Relay Station 47, represent the
Federation at the inauguration of the president of Altair
VI, transport Ambassador Troi to Pacifica, and so forth.
Over the course of this mission, the ship may be contact-
ed by Starfleet Command (through its assigned admiral)
to address certain emergent situations, such as divert-
ing a planet-killing asteroid or assisting in a breakout of
Phyrox plague. Also, of course, the crew may stumble
upon circumstances that demand immediate attention;
a starship captain has the authority to divert to handle
these situations as well (subject to later Command
review). So, in effect, a ship’s “ongoing” mission is
actually a number of specific missions that fall under her
over-arching assignment.
LONG-DURATION MISSIONS
IN THE 23RD CENTURY, STARSHIP TOURS WERE LIM-
ited to a duration of five years. During those five years,
ship and crew were often far from Starfleet support.
Aside from occasional stops at a starbase, it was possi-
ble for a starship crew to go for months without seeing
another Federation citizen. The strain on ship and crew
could be challenging, and it was decided to limit deploy-
ments so ships could be refitted and repaired, and crew
could return home for extended shore leave.
In the 24th century, with the advent of new technol-
ogies and larger ships, Starfleet shifted to long-term,
open-ended deep space missions. Improvements in
replicator technology and the invention of the holodeck
eased the strain on crewmembers. Advances in com-
munications meant that ships were not as out-of-touch
as they once were. And in the biggest change, families
could now join their Starfleet family member, easing the
effects of separation and isolation.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
QUARTERS
QUARTERS FOR OFFICERS DIFFER BETWEEN ERA,
ship class, and officer rank. Newly arrived Academy
graduates and other junior officers (also referred to as
“lower deckers”) commonly bunk in communal areas on,
yes, the lower decks. These dormitories are frequently
located on the ship’s interior, with no viewports and limit-
ed amenities.
Some ship designs—e.g., the California class—can
house dozens of junior officers with bunks (sometimes
referred to as “racks”) built into the walls along long
corridors. On ships with tighter crew quarters, the racks
hang three or four high with little space above or below.
Each rack consists of a comfortable mattress, individ-
ualized micro-environmental controls, and a portable
computer access device.
Senior officers, and those with families, have pri-
vate quarters generally the size of a small suite.
Commanders, lieutenants, and the chief medical officer
also have dedicated cabins in which they can entertain
small groups of people. The captain and executive
officer have their own suite consisting of a day cabin,
sleeping cabin, refresher (bathroom with tub or shower),
office area, living area, and dining room.
Guests and VIPs are usually assigned special quarters
in the upper decks of the ship, though visiting cadets or
junior officers might be expected to bunk in the lower
decks. In all cases, crew quarters tend to be smaller
in earlier eras, growing as Starfleet developed in both
resources and family-friendliness.
AUREA FRENIERE
: . What I was taught
CHIEF PETTY OFFICER ADAM NORAS,
U.S.S. OJIBWE
My mother was a Romulan and my father, a Human
fisherman from Vancouver. I was worried for a long time
that I’d be looked at with suspicion because of how the
Galaxy views Romulans, but that wasn’t the case.
My mother and father taught me one of the most impor-
tant lessons of all: you are never where you come from,
you are what you present to the world. They meant to
always be the best you can be and be honest about it.
Did I have some problems here and there? I’d be lying
if I didn’t. But, at the same time, I made some great
friends and colleagues because I was authentic to
those teachings. My father and I spent time together
before he passed away. He said he was proud of me for
staying true to what I was taught. My parents instilled
me that I am what I give back to the world into which I
am in. My father passed along his Indigenous cultural
teachings and prime among them were values such as
love, respect and humility. I believe that most of the time
I am doing my best to the best of my parents, my mixed
cultural upbringing and living my own truth.
I hope one day when I have my own family, I can pass
on those values and make the Galaxy a little bit better by
putting something good into it.
STARFLEET
53
: . CHAPTER 2.5
MISSION TYPES
“I didn’t join Starfleet to get in phaser fights.
I signed up to explore, to be out in space,
making new discoveries and peaceful
diplomatic solutions. That’s boldly going.
- Ensign Bradward Boimler
STARFLEET COMMAND HAS DEFINED
a set of standard mission types for its
crews to undertake. It is not unusual
to be given a duty outside this list, but
most of the work performed by Starfleet
crews is covered here. This list is broken
down into three primary categories:
science and exploration, diplomatic,
and defense and aid.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
ENSIGN
LANIYAR TENNAN
Given the vastness
of space and all the
possibilities it contains,
and given Starfleet’s
broad mandate to
‘explore strange new
worlds’, it’s no surprise
the types of missions
you and I might be
assigned are extensive.
This section details just
a few of the mission
types you and your
crew may be expected
to perform.
SCIENCE aND EXPLORATION
STARFLEET’S PRIMARY MISSION IS TO
explore space and expand the bounda-
ries of Federation knowledge. Every star-
ship is equipped with powerful sensor
arrays and probes that collect a wealth
of data. Each is, in many respects, like
bringing a powerful telescope farther
and farther out into the Galaxy. Many
of these missions simply involve going
somewhere new to see what there is to
be learned.
: . Deep Space
Exploration
This is what most people think of when
they think of Starfleet—the intrepid
explorer going where no one has gone
before. Deep space missions venture
beyond the limits of explored space
in order to see what’s out there. The
most common deep space exploration
mission simply involves collecting all
the data that the long-range scanners
can absorb. In this sector we see a
dark matter cluster. In the next one, a
new type of nebula. The sixth planet
orbiting Beta Librae is Class-M. While
to some this may seem uneventful, the
mapping of deep space provides the
data necessary for future exploratory
missions.
: . Planetary
Exploration and
Survey
A primary goal of Starfleet is to discover
and learn about new worlds. Once a
noteworthy planet has been identified,
it must be explored. Extensive scans of
the planet’s surface and atmosphere
must be made. Science teams must be
sent down to collect samples of flora
and fauna. Geological surveys need
conducting to determine mineralogical
composition and planetary develop-
ment. The crew of a starship could
spend a lifetime surveying all the plants,
minerals, and animals on a single world.
And if intelligent life-forms are present,
this complicates the process even fur-
ther, often leading to covertly monitoring
the civilization in order to determine the
viability of first contact.
54 CHAPTER 2
: . Research and
Development
Most starships in the fleet are equipped with the facili-
ties and personnel to conduct a wide variety of scientific
research. In addition to their standard exploration tasks,
the science officers aboard typically engage in their
own scientific studies, as well as hosting Federation
scientists performing independent research. Starships
often serve as excellent testbeds for new technological
developments, as well—improved transporters, en-
hanced computer systems, a more efficient warp drive,
experimental weapons; whatever new technology or
development some engineering genius comes up with
has to eventually be tested in the field.
DIPLOMATIC
BECAUSE OF THEIR MOBILITY, THEIR DEFENSIVE
capabilities, and their standing as projections of the
Federation out into the rest of the Galaxy, starships
also commonly serve as mobile diplomatic outposts.
Starfleet ships are frequently called upon to conduct
first contact missions, provide neutral ground for ne-
gotiations (for Federation members and non-members
alike), and transport ambassadors to important diplo-
matic hotspots.
: . Conflict Resolution
Starfleet strives to find a peaceful resolution to any
hostilities, even ones that do not involve the Federation
(Prime Directive permitting, of course). Starship crews
are often uniquely positioned to serve as impartial
arbiters in conflict situations, potentially bringing both
physical assistance and a fresh perspective. Starfleet
officers may even find themselves serving as impromptu
Federation diplomats, using their starship as neutral
ground for critical negotiations.
: . Diplomacy
Transporting a Federation envoy to negotiations on
Parliament. Ferrying the Dohlman of Elas to Troyius.
Escorting the Klingon Chancellor to peace talks on
Khitomer. Starfleet crews must lend whatever support
and assistance is necessary to see these diplomatic
missions to their successful completion, up to and
including providing security for diplomatic personnel
and protecting negotiations from outside meddling.
Diplomatic missions can in some ways be more
challenging than fighting the Borg—preventing oppos-
ing viewpoints from escalating into violence among
: . Stellar Phenomenon
Survey
Cataloging gaseous anomalies in the Beta Quadrant.
Monitoring the planetary breakup of Psi 2000. Collecting
data on a supernova or neutron star. Every stellar phe-
nomenon is different and unique; you never know what
new piece of information, what unexpected revelation,
you may retrieve from such an event. Even though the
Federation may have witnessed a hundred black holes,
there may be something about this one that is somehow
different, and scientifically relevant.
: . What lurks in
the dark
INTERCEPTED MESSAGE FROM WILLIAM RICCI,
FEDERATION COLONIST
I wanted a fresh start out here on this new Federation
colony, and to finally see the Galaxy, but I wonder what I
have gotten myself into. Sure, we have Federation ships
that can arrive quickly should trouble come knockin’,
but now, I worry myself sick thinking about what might
happen if they don’t come in time.
We know things like the Borg are out there and they
look for chances to assimilate or destroy whatever is in
their path. It could be Orion pirates or something else
entirely. Maybe it’ll work out and I’ll be fine but, then
again, maybe I won’t?
diplomats, keeping the crew’s own prejudices from
tainting the negotiations, and demonstrating the best
of Federation principles in the face of mistrust and
even hostility. Because the Federation’s goal is to foster
peace and amity throughout the Galaxy, some consider
diplomatic missions to be even more important than
scientific ones.
STARFLEET
55
CHIAM GARCIA
: . First Contact
Along with deep space exploration, this is the other
iconic mission for a Starfleet officer—to seek out new
life-forms and new civilizations. Once a new species has
been identified, they have to be studied; are they ready
to learn about other starfaring races? Are they poten-
tially hostile? After months, or even years, of long-range
reconnaissance and clandestine observation, when the
decision is made, someone has to make first contact.
This can be dangerous, with the potential to cause
societal upheaval for political or religious reasons. In
some cases, the Federation Council will send a qualified
ambassador to make first contact, but at other times it
will fall to a starship crew to reveal the existence of other
planets and “alien” civilizations. These missions require
: . What must be done
ENCRYPTED LOG ENTRY, CREWMAN WAYNE
RICHARDS, U.S.S. GUELPH (STARFLEET
INTELLIGENCE)
I love Starfleet and I believe in the mission of Starfleet, first
and foremost. I was recruited into Starfleet Intelligence
early on in my career and then eventually got the “call,”
so to speak. Blending in is a talent, secrecy is my native lan-
guage, and discretion is woven into every fiber of my being.
Diplomacy and peace are wonderful tools when you can
employ them properly, and even encouraged, but there
are times when a smile and a handshake won’t do it.
There are times when a more secretive approach is nec-
essary, and sometimes people get hurt, but I try not to
56 CHAPTER 2
a mix of patience, diplomacy, empathy, and even hon-
esty, as the contact team shows a civilization they have
friends in the wider Galaxy.
: . Second Contact
While related to first contact missions, second contact
missions are notably different, and also different from
third and subsequent contact encounters (which typically
become progressively easier). Second contact involves an
official follow-up encounter between representatives of
the Federation (usually Starfleet) and members of the new
civilization. These missions facilitate continued commu-
nication, help acclimate the new society to Starfleet and
the Federation, and help discover any important facts that
might have been missed by the first contact team.
as much as I can. I have done things that stain my hands
with blood and some may say, too much but is that not
the cost of freedom? You pay the price necessary so that
your friends, your family and others can sleep soundly
and believe that their little worlds are safe, protected and
free of from those who would do them harm. History is
written not just by the victorious but also by those willing
to take the pen and take corrective and decisive action
even if no one will read the footnotes to how we got here
in the first place.
I believe with all my heart and soul that the Federation
is worth protecting at any cost and sometimes I pay that
cost gladly and without thanks, acknowledgement but
knowing we are safe.
DEFENSE AND AID
SOME OF THE CAPABILITIES OF STARFLEET VESSELS
that help them in their role as galactic explorers also
make them well-suited to other roles. Their simple ability
to travel far and fast makes them useful in responding to
emergencies, as well as delivering important cargo and
personnel. And their defensive weapons enable them
to protect individuals—and even entire societies—from
attack by aggressors.
: . Aid and Relief
Starships are tasked with helping out those in trouble
whenever possible, assisting ships, outposts, or planets,
whether they involve Federation members or not. Such
missions include responding to a ship’s distress call,
providing medical supplies and personnel during a
disease outbreak, delivering food during a famine, and,
in extreme circumstances, even assisting in evacuating
a planetary population. These situations tend to come
with a critical time limit, and often a single starship is the
only one close enough to help.
: . Escort
Civilian or allied ships sometimes need protection on
their travels. This is most common when such vessels
journey outside the Federation, visit potentially hostile
civilizations, or carry especially coveted cargo. Escort
missions increase in frequency and importance during
wartime, when enemies attack vessels inside
Federation borders.
: . Patrol
Numerous potential threats confront the Federation—
hostilities along the Cardassian and Romulan borders,
the Borg, the Orion Syndicate, the Dominion, and many
more adversaries. In addition, while each Federation
member provides for their own planetary and star
system security, Starfleet patrols the routes inside
Federation space between member worlds, to ensure
the safety of civilian traffic. Patrol missions are simple:
patrol the space in your assigned area of operations,
scan for unidentified or potentially hostile vessels, and
intercept them. Conflict is always a last resort, and often
it is simply enough for a starship to “show the flag.”
: . Support Operations
The Federation has many starbases, deep space
stations, science outposts, mining facilities, and
colonies that require either occasional or frequent
support—supplies to transport, medical assessments
to perform, repairs to make, personnel to rotate, and
even shore leave to grant. There are many reasons for
a starship to pay a visit to remote, or not-so-remote,
Federation installations. These support missions main-
tain direct contact with Starfleet’s far-flung outposts
across the Galaxy, and help keep them functioning
efficiently and, it is hoped, happily.
: . Tactical
A hostile alien probe enters Federation space. The
Romulans attack outposts along the Neutral Zone. The
Borg assimilate a Starfleet outpost. A newly discovered
alien species approaches a member world aggressively.
It is at these times that Starfleet crews are called upon
to defend the Federation. These missions almost always
involve the threat of conflict, though Starfleet protocol
mandates the use of minimal force. Starfleet Command
will sometimes issue specific rules of engagement on
such a mission—in the form of Directives—in order to
avoid collateral damage, protect as many lives as possi-
ble, and avoid triggering an interstellar war.
 Fleet Operations
Though typical ship assignments involve a single vessel
undertaking missions on its own, several mission types
are sometimes assigned a fleet of ships operating
together. Defense and Aid missions are the ones most
likely to benefit from a group of ships, especially Aid and
Relief, Patrol, and Tactical missions.
Fleets can consist of only a few ships or as many as
several hundred. In a few rare cases, a fleet is composed
of ships from different governments; an example of
this is the Ninth Fleet, a group of Klingon and Starfleet
vessels that worked together during the Dominion War.
Numbered fleets are more common in wartime, whereas
small temporary fleets are often called task forces or bat-
tle groups, depending on their purpose.
Fleets are commanded by a fleet admiral, or sometimes
an admiral of lower rank but acting in a fleet-command
role. In the absence of a fleet admiral, a commodore can
command the fleet, or the most senior captain, tempo-
rarily designated the “fleet captain.”
STARFLEET
57
: . CHAPTER 2.6
AWAY TEAMS
“There’s more to serving Starfleet than just
individual excellence. Our ability to work
together, that’s our greatest strength.
- Captain Christopher Pike
STARSHIP CREWS ARE TASKED WITH
a wide variety of missions away from
their ship, ranging from diplomatic
and scientific assignments to military
operations. This is one reason such
crews are composed of a diverse pop-
ulation of experts in various fields and
specializations.
Except for the most routine missions, a
ship’s executive officer will most likely
lead an away team, as standard protocol
recommends the captain not accompa-
ny expeditions that could involve dan-
gerous situations. Away missions are
known for putting their crewmembers in
harm’s way, and risking the commanding
officer unnecessarily is frowned upon by
Starfleet Command.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
ENSIGN
LANIYAR TENNAN
While starships and
stations are powerful
technological wonders,
sometimes missions
or situations require
direct, hands-on
exploration. Like our
resident science
officer, Lieutenant
Hernandez, told me:
‘Boots on dirt and
tricorder in hand is how
real research happens’.
Read on to learn more
about the value of
away teams, or landing
parties, depending on
when you are in the
timeline.
EXPLORATION AND SCIENTIFIC
EXPLORATION AND EXPANDING SCI-
entific understanding and knowledge
are Starfleet’s primary missions. Two
common types of away teams that
conduct planetary missions are survey
teams and observation teams.
being careful to avoid interfering in
their natural development. These
teams study the inhabitants’ cus-
toms and sociological development
from concealed, cultural observation
posts hidden behind holographic
“duck blinds.” Anthropologists may
have the opportunity to interact and
experience the society’s culture, but
even with the advantage of surgical
alterations to blend in with the inhab-
itants, risks of exposing the society to
cultural contamination remain.
§ Survey teams perform the first
scientific studies of newly discovered
worlds. They conduct geological
surveys, catalog new species of plant
and animal life, survey the planet’s
mineral resources, and evaluate the
planet for potential exploitation and
colonization. On planets with an
intelligent population, survey teams
have the opportunity to explore the
culture’s behavior, society, and be-
liefs, in addition to their physical and
biological traits. Team members must
remember the restrictions on first
contact and avoid violating the social
norms of the indigenous culture.
§ Observation teams catalog pre-warp
civilizations and observe their culture,
Personnel assigned to observation
teams should research local customs
to minimize the risk of exposing their
presence. Crewmembers behaving
outside local custom or violating minor
laws that expose the presence of
non-native visitors can put the entire
mission at risk. Injured personnel may
be taken to local medical facilities where
local doctors could discover their alien
biology. Many of these incidents can be
explained away with an effective cover
58 CHAPTER 2
RHYS YORKE
story, such as being from a distant city or province. It is
essential that any cultural contamination is contained
and any evidence of the team’s presence is destroyed
to avoid violations of the Prime Directive. Additionally,
outside cultures not bound by the Prime Directive may
interfere with the natural cultural development of a cul-
ture, and it is the duty of Starfleet to protect that natural
development.
Upon completion of a survey or observation mission, the
planet’s details are gathered in a planetary survey report
and sent to Starfleet Command. The Exploration Corps
and the Federation Diplomatic Corps use the informa-
tion gathered to determine future treaties, plan new
Federation colonies, and evaluate new species for entry
into the Federation.
DIPLOMATIC
ONE OF THE FEDERATION’S CORE PRINCIPLES IS
promoting peace and understanding among all species,
and a Starfleet vessel can be an effective platform for
promoting such peace. A starship can act as neutral
ground for negotiations as diplomatic teams represent
the Federation during tense political situations, acting as
neutral parties negotiating treaties between fierce rivals.
Diplomatic missions may at first seem to be rather
straightforward affairs, but the mores and traditions of
Personnel specializing in biology, botany, geology, and
other physical sciences are useful on survey teams.
Observation teams want members skilled in anthropol-
ogy, archaeology, sociology, and other social sciences.
However, away team leaders should consider not only
having a team with members whose skills fit the needs
of the mission, but one with a wide variety of skills.
Exploring a new planet can bring a myriad of challeng-
es, and a diverse skillset gives a team an edge in both
success and survival.
Finally, the unknown factors of investigating unexplored
worlds bring a wide variety of dangers, ranging from ag-
gressive animal life to hostile indigenous peoples to un-
stable ancient ruins that may contain dormant defensive
systems. Security officers are often included to provide
protection to away team personnel.
alien cultures are frequently both subtle and complicat-
ed. Failure to understand and respect the cultures of
species involved can disrupt negotiations, preventing
progress or even exacerbating an already tense situa-
tion. This is especially true of peace negotiations, where
the diplomats must navigate the complex relationship
between embittered enemies. It is essential for away
team members to familiarize themselves with the cultur-
al traditions and expectations of the species involved.
STARFLEET
59
RELIEF TEAMS
Away teams also engage in a wide variety of relief mis-
sions: providing medical aid to plague-stricken worlds,
delivering food to starving populations, relocating refu-
gees fleeing conflict, constructing emergency shelters
for at-risk populations, and other humanitarian efforts.
Medical teams must be prepared to act at a moment’s
notice to provide medical care. Security teams should
expect tense situations where oppressive regimes, ter-
rorists, or other hostile actors target Starfleet personnel
and those they have come to help. Engineering teams
must be ready to repair vital systems on damaged star-
ships and planetary facilities quickly enough to prevent
catastrophe. Practice and preparation will help them
face any eventuality.
Successfully executing relief operations requires
constant training and preparation. Tragedies can unfold
quickly, and an organized response minimizes suffering
and loss of life. Crews must perform regular drills to plan
and prepare for every likely situation, keeping in mind
that there is no certainty regarding what they may face
in the field.
PEACEKEEPING AND MILITARY
STARFLEET SHIPS ARE TASKED WITH PROTECTING
the Federation from both internal and external threats.
While the Federation is not in open conflict with any
major power, it does experience regular risks, ranging
from Orion pirates to the Borg, and if war is formally
declared, any given crew will likely find themselves on
the front lines.
throughout the Federation. This is especially true of se-
curity teams, who regularly work on cases with local law
enforcement, protect Federation dignitaries, and defend
Federation facilities.
Under the auspices of the Federation Charter, Starfleet
is responsible for maintaining the peace within the
Federation and assisting its allies in regular peace-
keeping and interstellar law enforcement. While the
Federation is a society dedicated to peaceful co-exist-
ence, criminal enterprises and pirates are an ongoing
problem for border colonies and isolated trade lanes.
Starship crews are commonly deployed on a varie-
ty of away missions to maintain peace and security
Peacekeeping away tam members should be skilled
in a wide variety of security and investigative fields.
Forensics and criminal psychology help reveal the per-
petrators of crimes, while knowledge of the local culture
and politics can provide insight into local conflicts. In
the event of armed conflict, security personnel will
need a keen understanding of the area, an awareness of
entry and exit points, as well as any security systems or
other precautions already in place. Military operations
see personnel deployed in wartime, and understanding
tactics and strategy is essential for bringing personnel
home safely.
COVERT OPERATIONS
STARFLEET PREFERS DIPLOMATIC SOLUTIONS TO
resolve any problems with rival governments, but at
times Starfleet personnel are still required to take on
covert missions in the interest of the Federation. A
crew may be called upon to acquire important data,
covertly protect foreign dignitaries, rescue hostages,
or collect intelligence. Covert missions are key to the
security of the Federation, but the secrecy involved in
such missions means the Federation may be unable to
acknowledge a crew’s activities if they are captured.
Governments such as the Cardassian Union and the
Romulan Star Empire do not have the same respect for
individual rights as the Federation does, and records
show they are more than willing to subject captured
personnel to torture and summary execution.
60 CHAPTER 2
 Non-Starfleet Campaigns
Though Starfleet settings are the default for a game
of Star Trek Adventures, this is by no means the only
way to play the game. Players who wish to take on the
roles of non-Starfleet characters have plenty of options.
Some of these have been suggested by a series already,
such as the mixed crew of Starfleet and Bajoran Militia
officers working alongside civilians on Deep Space 9.
Detailed here are three common scenarios involving
non-Starfleet characters. You and your group are en-
couraged to use them, adapt them, or create your own
as your collective imagination dictates.
FEDERATION CIVILIANS IN A CIVILIAN SETTING
For a game setting that is even less militaristic than
Starfleet, player characters could be Federation civil-
ians operating in a non-Starfleet setting. Such settings
will likely be rare, as they are not inspired by any actual
Star Trek shows, but they may still appeal to a group of
players with a specific common interest, such as fans of
legal dramas who want to play a Federation legal team.
Or they could be members of the Federation govern-
ment in the halls of power, or colonists on a strange new
colony world full of mystery.
NON-STARFLEET CREW IN A STARFLEET SETTING
Star Trek has a well-established history of including
non-Starfleet personnel as part of the crew of a ship or
station. Possible roles a player could take on include a
civilian who has a function on the ship (perhaps also a
family member of a crewmember), an exchange officer
from an allied power, or a visiting citizen from a culture
of your own creation.
CREW ON ANOTHER CIVILIZATION’S SHIP
We are Klingons! Or, perhaps we are Romulans! Or
Ferengi, Cardassians, Dominion members, Orion
merchants (or pirates), or even Borg. These may require
adapting the character lifepath rules in Chapter 4 ac-
cordingly, and filling in some gaps in the details the se-
ries have shown regarding how the civilization operates
its fleet, but fans of a specific species may enjoy doing
this anyway.
NICK GREENWOOD
STARFLEET
61
CHAPTER 3
THE FINAL FRONTIER
3.1 Strange New Worlds 64
3.2 New Lives and
Civilizations 70
3.3 Space-Based Phenomena 72
3.4 The Dangers of Space 75
3.5 Spacetime and SubSpace 77
3.6 Alternate Universes 79
3.7 Time Travel 81
JUSTIN USHER
63
: . CHAPTER 3.1
STRANGE NEW WORLDS
“We’re Starfleet officers. Weird’ is part of the job.
- Captain Kathryn Janeway
FOR ALL THE COUNTLESS STARS IN
our Galaxy, the majority have at least
one planet in their orbit. These plane-
tary systems develop out of the same
nebula which formed the star, and the
types of planets can vary widely. It is
the responsibility of Starfleet (and the
scientific branches of other spacefaring
civilizations) to continue cataloguing
planetary systems and space sectors
to help better understand the overall
development of the Galaxy.
COSMOLOGICAL ADDRESS
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LIEUTENANT
ZOE HERNANDEZ
Hi there! I’m Lieutenant
Zoe Herandez, chief
science officer aboard
the U.S.S. Challenger.
Science is a key
element of the setting,
and will likely play a
major role in many of
the stories you’re likely
to experience. The
commodore suggested
I give you a primer on
some key science and
scientific elements
prevalent in the Star
Trek universe, so read
on; you just may learn
something amazing!
Let’s ease into it by
talking about planets.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO UNDERSTAND
the order and scale of objects in the
universe, and these can sometimes
get confused. At the smallest scale are
planets, which are round objects found
around stars in their own orbit. They may
have moons, which could be any size as
long as they are locked in orbit around
the planet. A star system includes the
central star (or stars, if two or more stars
are locked in orbit around each other,
though these are rare), and any planets,
moons, dwarf planets, asteroids, or com-
ets locked in orbit. Dwarf planets orbit a
star, but are not large enough to become
spherical nor clear out their path of
smaller objects either by disruption or
accumulation. This classification was
established on Earth by pre-Starfleet
scientists in Earth year 2006.
Star systems exist within sectors, a
designation established to help local-
ize areas and aid in navigation and are
approximately 20 light-years by 20 light-
years by 20 light-years. The Milky Way
is divided into four quadrants: Alpha,
Beta, Gamma, and Delta. The Alpha and
Beta Quadrants are the most explored,
as most of the Federation resides in
these two quadrants. It was not until the
U.S.S. Voyager found itself traversing
the Delta Quadrant that Starfleet had
an understanding of its star systems
and local phenomena, and the Gamma
Quadrant is notable by its connection to
the Bajoran wormhole and prominence
in the Dominion War.
A galaxy is a large collection of stars
isolated in groupings from one another.
The Milky Way is one galaxy in the Local
Group, which also consists of another
large spiral galaxy: The Andromeda
Galaxy, and a handful of small dwarf
galaxies. Starfleet has only explored
within the confines and near edges of
the Milky Way Galaxy and the Federation
only spans regions in the Alpha and Beta
Quadrants.
64 CHAPTER 3
All of these designations aids in mapping the billions of
stars within the Galaxy. To identify a planet, the following
information is used in increasing scale:
§ Planet
§ Star System
§ Sector
§ Quadrant
§ Milky Way Galaxy
: . Class-M
Class-M is the most important and primary planet for
the purposes of Starfleet tracking and databases. This
is because these planets are considered habitable, and
more specifically, Earth-like. While it is acknowledged
there are many types of life-forms that could consider
other classes liveable, Class-M planets are more likely to
have advanced species that may be considered by the
Federation, but, more importantly, can offer safe harbor
to Starfleet personnel in a crisis. The “M” designation is
short for “Minshara,” which is the Vulcan designation for
a planet suitable for humanoid life.
Planets are classified by generic properties which help
quickly identify and understand the potential risks and
opportunities present when one is discovered. Following
are the various classifications, starting with the most
popular and then in alphabetical order after. Identifying
parameter ranges for gravity, atmospheric pressure, and
temperature are given, though care must be taken to
understand these are generic identifiers and it’s possible
to have a class of planet where one parameter may fall
outside this range.
The major geological characteristic which enables a
Class-M planet is a molton rock mantle surrounding a
metallic core. This creates a magnetic field which pro-
tects the atmosphere from erosion due to solar winds
and subsequently retains liquid water on the surface due
to atmospheric pressure.
Gravity is given in G which is multiples of Earth’s gravity,
which is equivalent to 9.81 m/s2, Atmosphere is given in
units of atm, where 1 atm is equal to Earth’s average at-
mospheric pressure and equal to 1.01 x 105 N/m2, and
finally temperature is given in Celsius, an Earth standard
which is 273 degrees above absolute zero. Additional
risks and rewards for each planetary classification are
also suggested, though not limited to what is presented.
RELEVANT STATISTICS:
§ Gravity: 0.6-1.4 G
§ Atmosphere: 0.8-1.2 atm
§ Temperature: -25–45⁰ C
RISKS: Dependent on the planet, there are no standard
risks that are common across all Class-M planets.
REWARDS: There is a high likelihood of exobiological
discoveries, and potential first contact with advanced
civilizations if appropriate cautions are taken.
 SECTORS
Sectors and quadrants are designations unique to the
Star Trek universe. Modern-day astronomers do not use
these nomenclatures, if for the simple fact that we have
not explored or mapped out our Galaxy enough to make
it worthwhile. Therefore, the method of assigning sec-
tors is pieced together from various appearances and
has a lot of flexibility as there is no one “rule” for it. For
the purposes of Star Trek Adventures, gamemasters
may feel free to use their own method, as long as the Sol
System (Earth) is the central sector, aka Sector 001.
THE FINAL FRONTIER
65
TOBIAS RICHTER
: . Class-D
Class-D planets are the first with any potential for
activity or interesting features that may be of interest to
a Starfleet crew. These are typically asteroids or moons
and tend to be the most common in a star system due to
the lack of atmosphere and their smaller, indiscriminate
size. If only in orbit around a star (likely in a belt of like
objects) it is considered an asteroid, and if it is in the
gravitational field of a planet, it is considered a moon.
RELEVANT STATISTICS:
§ Gravity: 0.01 – 1 G
§ Atmosphere: < 0.001 atm
§ Temperature: -100 to -75⁰ C
RISKS: Space environmental suits must be worn on the
surface at all times due to the low temperature and lack
of atmosphere. The low gravity may also cause mechani-
cal and physical difficulties.
REWARDS: The abundance of these types of planetoid
results in a significant amount of resources such as
water ice and metals.
66
CHAPTER 3 CHAPTER 3
: . Class-H
There are a handful of unique planets that fall under the
Class-H category. Class-H planets are primarily des-
ert-like and slightly smaller than most Class-M planets.
They are hot and dry with very little surface water. They
are only slightly habitable for the majority of humanoids,
and some adjustments may need to be made to make it
comfortable to live.
RELEVANT STATISTICS:
§ Gravity: 0.6-1.4 G
§ Atmosphere: 0.7 - 1.5 atm
§ Temperature: 0–50⁰ C
RISKS: The hazards of Class-H plan-
ets will likely be due to higher tem-
peratures. Additionally, it is possible
that some form of radiation is what
initiated the desert-like conditions.
This may result in residual radiation that
over long periods of time may affect any
humanoids. Atmospheric composition may
be hazardous. There is likely little water to be found on
these planets.
REWARDS: Under emergency situations, it is possible
to survive on a Class-H planet for a short period of time.
Studying the past conditions and planetary evolution
of Class-H planets may also help understand different
environmental conditions that could predict the future of
Class-M planets.
: . Echo 2 Anomaly
SCIENCE OFFICER LOG: T’POL (2151)
Upon reviewing the initial installation of the Echo 2
subspace buoy, I discovered an anomalous signal. It ap-
pears a burst of unique frequencies was detected within
a five-minute window of activation. Analysis has not
uncovered the source and this particular energy surge
has not repeated.
I have shared these findings with Communications
Officer Hoshi Sato, as in her role, she may have encoun-
tered similar energy readings. Not being able to aid
further, her only formal response was “Wow,” confirming
the uniqueness of this signal.
As subspace communications are only just being devel-
oped, I have sent the readings to both Starfleet and the
Vulcan Science Council for further investigation.
: . Class-K
Unlike Class-J planets with no discernible surface,
Class-K worlds have a solid surface but are nearly im-
possible to survive on without extensive terraforming. A
key identifier of a Class-K world is its frigid temperatures.
These temperatures may be due to an almost total lack
of atmosphere such as Mars, or a significant distance
from the home star which does not allow for heat
absorption despite the potential presence of a dense
atmosphere.
A further classifier if the atmosphere is present, is if it
is breathable by the majority of Starfleet personnel, so
planets high in methane or argon would be considered
uninhabitable Class-K planets. Only in extreme emer-
gencies should crew consider setting foot on a Class-K
world, and only if there are enough supplies and facilities
to isolate the shelter from the surrounding environment.
RELEVANT STATISTICS:
§ Gravity: 0.5-2.0 G
§ Atmosphere: 0.001 to 10 atm
§ Temperature: -100–0⁰ C
: . Class-J
The most common gas giant planets fall under the
Class-J category. These tend to be large planets and
can orbit at any distance from the parent star. The
atmospheres are dense and mostly hydrogen with no
known surface to land on or inhabit. It is possible to set
up orbital stations around the planet or within the outer
atmosphere. This is particularly beneficial for mining hy-
drogen and other elements. With no discernible surface,
the atmospheric pressure and temperature statistics are
highly variable and irrelevant for visiting.
RISKS: Hazards on Class-K worlds are primarily due to
the lack of or incompatible atmosphere. The tempera-
ture may be mitigated for short periods of time.
REWARDS: Atmospheres of Class-K worlds (if the atmo-
sphere is present) could be a source of unique chemical
structures such as methane or hydrocarbon chains.
RELEVANT STATISTICS:
§ Gravity: 0.8–4 G (at the top of the atmosphere)
RISKS: The massive and dense atmospheres can be
incredibly hazardous when entering. Additionally, there
are high temperatures and radiation within the clouds.
REWARDS: Class-J planets frequently have Class-M
worlds orbiting as moons.
THE FINAL FRONTIER
67
: . Class-L
Planets which possess some life but are largely unin-
habitable are considered Class-L planets. These have
limited vegetation and hardly any animal creatures. The
planets are likely early in their evolution and so larger
creatures and a more diverse food chain have yet to
develop. The atmospheres are likely high in oxygen and
argon and have compositions unfriendly to most human-
oid crew members.
: . Class-T
Compared to the Class-J planets, Class-T are considered
“ultra-giants” and are widely thought to be the largest
objects that could even be classified as planets. If not or-
biting in a star system, a Class-T planet would be consid-
ered a “brown dwarf” or a early star that never reached
a high enough density to increase the temperature or
begin fusion. Most Class-T planets are found in early
star systems while the surrounding planetary system is
still continuing to form.
RELEVANT STATISTICS:
§ Gravity: 0.6-1.4 G
§ Atmosphere: 0.7 - 2.5 atm
§ Temperature: -10–60⁰ C
If not flung from the star due to its high mass, the
surrounding atmosphere will likely be sapped by other
objects near its orbit and redistributed to the still-form-
ing star system. Like Class-J planets, the atmospheric
pressure and temperature statistics are widely variable
throughout the planet and therefore are irrelevant.
RISKS: Class-L planets are sometimes confused as
a Class-M planet, so care must be taken to carefully
analyze the atmospheric composition as well as the bio-
logical life present to make a clear determination before
landing on the surface. Without proper precautions,
and especially in emergency situations, a crew could
find themselves in a dire scenario if on the surface of a
Class-L world.
RELEVANT STATISTICS:
§ Gravity: 2–15 G (at the surface of the atmosphere)
RISKS: As with any young star system, the material
within is incredibly turbulent and has not settled into
predictable orbits. Observations of a Class T planet run
the risk of collisions with other objects and disrupted
gravity fields.
REWARDS: These worlds offer an opportunity for ex-
ogeologists and exobiologists to examine planets early
in their evolutionary processes. The majority of Class-L
worlds have primitive atmospheres, life, and geological
formations.
REWARDS: Studying the early formation of star sys-
tems is of particular interest to astrophysicists and such
data may help understand future evolution of nearby
star-forming nebulae.
68
CHAPTER 3 CHAPTER 3
: . Class-Y
Also known as “Demon Planets” these worlds are noted
for their incredibly dense and toxic atmosphere, high
temperatures, and significant radiation fields. Any one
of these parameters makes a planet difficult to study
from the surface, but, combined, significantly increases
the risk of unpredictable and catastrophic events. The
atmospheric composition and radiation fields of these
Class-Y worlds also makes sensor analysis from orbit
nearly impossible. This class of planets is considered by
Starfleet to be the least hospitable to humanoid life and
are almost instantaneously fatal if special protections
are not taken.
: . PLANETARY ANOMALIES
While every attempt has been made to categorize
potential planetary worlds, there will always be unique
circumstances and anomalies. Any planet that does not
fit the standard classification is requested by Starfleet to
have further analysis performed and logged. Some ex-
amples of anomalous worlds deemed worthy of further
evaluation include binary planet systems, planets with
temperatures or atmospheres thought to be impossible
based on the distance from the parent star, or apparently
hostile environments which have an abundance of life-
forms present.
RELEVANT STATISTICS:
§ Gravity: 0.5–1.5 G
§ Atmosphere: 2–200 atm
§ Temperature: 40–800 ⁰ C
Another interest for Starfleet scientists and engineers is
planets which exhibit indicators of past life and technol-
ogy but for some reason are now abandoned. Studying
these worlds helps understand the impact of advanced
technology on a planet’s evolution as well as the possi-
ble future of Federation worlds.
RISKS: Radiation, atmospheric pressure, and tempera-
ture are all deadly on the surface of a Class Y planet.
REWARDS: There is no advantage or possible reward
worth the risks on a Class-Y planet.
THE FINAL FRONTIER
69
: . CHAPTER 3.2
NEW LIVES AND
CIVILIZATIONS
“It’s hard to believe how many are out there.
- Gwyndala
THIS SECTION DETAILS KEY LIFE-
forms and a list of potential encounters
to keep in mind while exploring.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LIEUTENANT
ZOE HERNANDEZ
As a Starfleet crew
member, or really any
sort of space traveller,
it’s common to interact
with new life-forms
and species, which
may or may not be
easy to understand
or communicate
with. These can be
widely variable in form
such as creatures,
plants, fungi, or
something completely
new. Every attempt
should be made to
maintain peace and
understanding, even
when communication
is difficult.
: . Humanoids
The majority of interactions with re-
corded species and life-forms, will be
humanoids. Humanoids are typically de-
fined by being carbon-based, breathing
standard Class-M atmospheres, usually
bipedal, and possessing some method
of communication, be it speech, ges-
tures, telepathy, or symbols like writing.
Humanoids on a planet are likely near or
at the top of their respective food chain.
: . Predators
and Aggressive
Creatures
Large creatures, whether at the top of
the food chain or not, may post a risk
to away team personnel. Attacks may
occur for a variety of reasons such as
being territorial, protecting young, or
seeing the crew as tasty prey! When
creatures are exhibiting aggressive
behavior, crew should begin backing
away while maintaining eye contact. If
distance cannot be maintained, away
teams should arm themselves with
phasers set to stun while preparing
to run or request emergency beam-
out. Turning backs to an aggressive
predator is extremely risky, and only
special knowledge of similar creatures
will indicate whether reactions such
as making oneself large and aggres-
sive to ward off, or small and timid will
be effective mitigation techniques. A
trained exobiologist or similar will be
able to make these judgments, but all
other crew should simply attempt a safe,
rapid escape.
 FOOD CHAIN
Each planet capable of life will have
a defined food chain through which
energy is transferred from one organism
to another through consumption. Upon
arrival at a new uncharted planet, it is
imperative for the science division to
establish as best as possible the food
chain and organisms within. This work
will help limit any impacts to the planet
by the arrival of personnel.
Plants and smaller organisms widely
consumed by larger predators have a
higher population and are more robust
from long-term impacts to the ecosys-
tem. Alternatively, apex predators and
others near the top of the food chain
have much smaller populations and run
the risk of adverse effects if eliminated.
Full documentation of a planet’s food
chain can be incredibly difficult, but a
general attempt and understanding is
possible and necessary.
70 CHAPTER 3
Even the most passive creatures may pose a threat
when in large groups. There is an ongoing threat of
stampedes or herds which can quickly overwhelm a
small away team. Care should be taken when dealing
with encountering large groups of creatures and it is
advisable to exit the area with haste.
Some aggressive creatures may be more subtle and
their attacks less obvious. The primary type of crea-
ture that falls into this category are parasites. Parasitic
creatures use their target host for feeding and potential
infiltration and control. Not all parasitic creatures are
hostile, as some may seek a symbiotic relationship that
benefits both, but this is not a risk worth taking.
: . Unique Life-forms
When it comes to discovering new life in the universe,
knowledge is mostly limited by what is already known.
Essentially this means that when a crew is looking for
potential life, you will use indicators dependent on our
current understanding like a need for water, a certain
atmosphere, and known methods of communication.
The three main categories to classify unique life-forms
are non-humanoid, non-carbon based, and spacefar-
ing life-forms.
NON-HUMANOID LIFE-FORMS
There are plenty of creatures who are not considered
humanoid. Where they become of particular interest
is when these are considered intelligent or advanced.
These are sometimes difficult to identify, though ad-
vanced technologies may be detected to help indicate
their presence.
NON-CARBON BASED LIFE-FORMS
Life-forms which are non-carbon based are incredibly
difficult to detect and discover. This is because the
fundamental processes which define life-forms and
creatures as identified on Class-M planets are based on
their chemical and biological needs as carbon-based
life-forms. Creatures such as the Horta found on Janus
VI are silicon-based, which has different requirements
and, more importantly, is not detectable by standard
scanning equipment. Communication with these life-
forms is typically difficult due to their unique nature, and
telepathy has typically been the most effective method.
SPACEFARING LIFE-FORMS
Occasionally, explorers encounter creatures capable of
living isolated in the vacuum of space. These can pose
unique threats to a starship and can inadvertently trigger
a dangerous scenario. While rare, these encounters do
happen, such as the crystalline entity incidents.
MATHEUS GRAEF
THE FINAL FRONTIER
71
: . CHAPTER 3.3
SPACE-BASED
PHENOMENA
THIS SECTION DISCUSSES SOME OF
the most common spatial phenomena
present in the Galaxy. You’re likely to en-
counter or experience these during your
“A dying star. What a rare
and exciting way to meet our doom!
- Zero
campaigns and missions. Whole story
arcs could be developed around any one
of these phenomena.
STELLAR LIFE-CYCLE
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LIEUTENANT
ZOE HERNANDEZ
One of the key
expectations for
Starfleet personnel is
to log and understand
the universe and all the
different phenomena
out there. While we’ve
been doing this for a
while and have a pretty
good understanding
of most common
phenomena, there’s
always something
new to encounter and
discover.
STARS FORM OUT OF A NEBULA CON-
sisting of primarily hydrogen gas, but
with some helium, trace amounts of
heavier elements, and dust. Small parti-
cles will begin attaching to one another,
increasing their mass and therefore
increasing the likelihood, due to gravity,
that more particles will accrete. A snow-
ball effect then occurs where a large
mass begins to form in the center of the
nebula. This central mass has increased
density and therefore an increased tem-
perature, which is further encouraged
by the friction of all these particles as
they collide and merge with one another.
At this point the central mass is glowing
from the heat, but has not begun fusion
and therefore is defined as a protostar.
The surrounding nebula is still coalesc-
ing and the angular momentum causes
the nebula to flatten as other particles
begin to merge together to form poten-
tial planets and other system objects.
 NEBULA
The term “nebula” is commonly used
across astronomy. Derived from the
ancient Earth language Latin, nebula
simply means “cloud” or “fog” based on
how these objects looked in early tele-
scopes. However, current understanding
is that there is a huge variety of nebulae
in the universe, with a variety of origins,
purpose, size, and composition. The
majority of nebulae are informed by the
stellar life-cycle, either at the formation
of stars or a result of the death of a star.
A star-forming region may be several to
hundreds of light-years in diameter and
may have dozens of stars forming within.
Planetary nebulae and supernova rem-
nants are typically smaller and localized
to a former star system.
If mass continues to accrete, the interior
becomes so hot and dense the hy-
drogen is fused and becomes helium.
When this occurs, the protostar is now
considered a star and resides on the
main sequence of the Hertzsprung-
Russell Diagram (see page 73) which
also defines the star’s type. The majority
of the star’s lifetime is spent combining
hydrogen into helium. Scientists have
performed experiments to accelerate
this process or manipulate it in some
other way, though no successful, large-
scale techniques for interfering with
solar fusion have been logged.
72 CHAPTER 3
While a star is going through its lifetime, it is balanced
between gravitational and radiation pressure. The gravi-
tational pressure is from the sheer amount of mass that
makes up the star all continuing to fall down on itself
and compress in the middle, but this is balanced by the
radiation emanating from the fusion processes that push
out from the center.
Once a star runs out of hydrogen in the core, the helium
begins fusing into carbon and heavier elements until a
mass limit is reached (dependent on the initial mass).
During this stage, the change in the inner chemistry
results in the star reddening and expanding into a red
giant. While there are some unique cases, most stars
will go through this stage. In terms of time scales, stars
will fuse hydrogen and spend billions of years on the
main sequence, and the red giant phase is on the order
of a few hundred thousand years, on average.
The star continues to fuse heavier elements until it even-
tually runs out. At this point two outcomes occur that are
dependent on the initial mass of the star. For the majority of
Life Cycle of Stars
Massive
Star
Average
Star
Red Super
Giant
Red Giant
Stellar
Nebula
SuperNova
Black Hole Neutron star
Planetary
Nebula
White Dwarf
stars, like Sol, they will run out of fuel and the outer layers
will slough off, leaving behind a glowing core called a white
dwarf. For massive stars, the sudden loss of radiation
pressure causes the star to collapse in on itself. Eventually
a mass density limit is reached and the layers continuing
to collapse will bounce off, resulting in an explosion of
light. That extremely dense core that has been pushed
to its limit will either be a neutron star or a black hole.
STELLAR CLASSIFICATION
STARS SPEND THE MAJORITY OF THEIR LIFE IN WHAT
is called the main sequence while they fuse hydrogen
into helium. The term “main sequence” comes from
the Hertzprung-Russell diagram, on which a clear line
is visible where stars are defined by their temperatures
and luminosity (intrinsic brightness). These characteris-
tics (which also take into account mass) define a star’s
spectral class.
: . The Hertzprung-
Russell Diagram
First defined in the early 20th century on Earth, astrono-
mers were able to assemble spectrographic surveys of
stars and begin defining classifications. When grouping
Hertzprung-Russell Diagram
HOT
AND
BRIGHT
HOT
AND
DIM
10
10
10
1
6
4
2
-2
10
-4
10
COOL
AND
BRIGHT
COOL
AND
DIM
40k 20k 10k 5k 2.5k
stars by luminosity and temperature, a pattern emerg-
es where one or two characteristics are able to inform
additional parameters. The Hertzprung-Russel Diagram
(or “H-R Diagram”) is a simple way to define and classify
many parameters at once. If a star’s temperature and
brightness are known, it will also define the average
mass and lifespan of the star. As stars go through their
lifetime, they will “fall off” the main sequence as they en-
ter the red giant phase and further if it becomes a white
dwarf. Finding where a star falls within this diagram is in-
formative to astronomers and helps them to understand
stellar populations and life-cycles.
: . Spectral Classes
Work done on star spectra primarily by women on Earth
in the early 20th century helped understand the compo-
sition of stars. As the understanding of stellar popula-
tions exploded, many methods of classifications and
categories emerged. The work of Annie Jump Cannon
and the other “Harvard Computers” resulted in an alpha-
betical classification. When stars are assembled on the
H-R Diagram, the spectral types in order from hottest
and brightest to coolest and dimmest go O-B-A-F-G-K-M.
Sol is a Class-G star and is considered average in terms
of mass, temperature, brightness, and lifetime.
THE FINAL FRONTIER
73
ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
The majority of observations of worlds and the Galaxy is
through the reflection and emission of light. Light is not
limited to visible, such as detected by Human eyes, but
makes up a full range of spectra. The electromagnetic
spectrum ranges from low frequency, low energy waves
such as radio or microwave through visible up to high
frequency and high energy waves like x-rays and gamma
rays. Light may be reflected off an object, informing the
composition, or it may be emitted intrinsically.
: . subspace
energy surge
One further method of observation using the electro-
magnetic spectrum is through absorption, in which
light from a background emitter passes through a non-
opaque medium which absorbs certain frequencies
of the spectra. An observer on the other side will note
gaps and may determine the composition of the interim
material. This analysis and the majority of additional
observations made of stellar objects are done using
spectroscopy, where the electromagnetic signal is
diffracted through a prism and peaks or gaps may deter-
mine composition.
 Spectrometry
The primary method for astronomical analysis is through
spectroscopy. This process takes electromagnetic light
and diffracts it, breaking it up into different frequencies.
Analysis of these frequencies establishes peaks and
troughs through which scientists can understand the
composition of associated material. These frequencies
are identified when electrons in an atom jump to specif-
ic energy levels and then drop, absorbing and emitting
light at that energy level. Further spectral lines may
come from energy due to molecular vibrations such as
found in H2 or H2O molecules.
When a science officer is attempting to identify the
composition of a nebula, or the atmosphere of a planet,
or other object in the universe, they can perform as
“spectroscopic analysis” which will isolate and identify
the different elements and molecules present.
PERSONAL CORRESPONDENCE,
LT. KATHRYN JANEWAY (2360)
Tuvok,
I hope Jupiter Station is treating you well and that you
are privileged with many interesting conundrums. In
case not, I have one for you. I was tasked with leading
a team to replace a retired subspace communications
relay. While performing calibration readings, I detected
an electromagnetic feedback charge that overload-
ed my sensors. The calibration sensor was limited to
24.000 milliamps so there are likely many sources which
could cause this. However, the mystery deepened while
reviewing the wide-band electromagnetic spectral
sensor. A surge in electricity would likely be accompa-
nied by some form of electromagnetism; however, no
signal emerged above the background noise. It doesn’t
help that we don’t know what type of signal to look for,
otherwise I would have suggested a matched-filtering
algorithm to help enhance any signals in the data.
Out of all the hundreds of subspace relays Starfleet has
installed, I only found one subspace relay installation
anomaly, back when the program was first started.
Science Officer T’Pol sent a set of data to Starfleet not-
ing an energy surge during the installation of Echo 2. If
you still have access to the Vulcan Science Directorate,
any chance I could beg a favor? It’s likely T’Pol sent the
records to Vulcan as well.
Be well my friend,
Kathryn
74 CHAPTER 3
: . CHAPTER 3.4
THE DANGERS OF SPACE
“Space is disease and danger
wrapped in darkness and silence.
- Dr. Leonard “Bones” McCoy
WHILE DEEMED WORTHY OF RE-
search, exploration, and long missions
away from home in the name of the
above, outer space nevertheless pre-
sents a multitude of risks and dangers.
Analyzing and preparing for these
inevitable encounters may help mitigate
potential threat to or loss of life, however
unpredictable they may be. These envi-
ronmental dangers can be divided into
what are considered transient (short-
lived) or continuous.
TRANSIENT THREATS
In a Galaxy filled with a variety of objects
at different stages of their life, the unpre-
dictable is certain to occur. While rare, if
caught in the cross-fire of these events,
the crew or an entire starship may be at
risk. Dedicated observation of sensors,
a mapping of the nearby environment,
and an understanding of astronomical
processes may help prepare your ship.
The following are the most common
transient events, though care should be
taken to understand this is not a com-
prehensive list of the possibilities.
: . Solar Flares
While observing a star system, solar
activity may impact the functionality
of a starship. As large balls of plasma,
main-sequence stars build up magnet-
ic fields through their rotation. At the
peak of this activity, the magnetic field
and trapped radiation may suddenly
break free and a high density of solar
radiation and high-energy particles will
travel through the solar system. While
unlikely to be hit in the cross-fire of such
an event, getting hit with a solar flare
will likely threaten shields and electrical
systems throughout the ship.
An extreme version of a solar flare is
known as a Coronal Mass Ejection
(CME). This is where the solar flare is
so intense, it carries an abundance of
massive particles that can also physical-
ly do damage to a planet or starship. If
hit with a CME, not only will shields and
electrical equipment be knocked offline
(as if hit with an electromagnetic pulse
weapon) but the crew will be at risk of
radiation exposure.
: . Gamma-Ray
Bursts
There are multiple types of Gamma Ray
Bursts (GRBs) that occur throughout the
Galaxy on a regular basis. The two types
are considered “short”, less than two
seconds in duration, and “long”, longer
than two seconds. The origin of these
events is due to either colliding compact
objects or a star explosion at the end of
its life, respectively. GRBs contain such
high amounts of energy that they are ra-
diated in a beam, like a lighthouse. This
means the likelihood of direct impact is
rare, but they also are able to do damage
at distances up to dozens of light years
from the source. If hit with a GRB,
shields will be knocked offline, perhaps
LIEUTENANT
ZOE HERNANDEZ
Space is dangerous.
There’s no way to
sugar-coat it. Our ships
and stations are thin-
hulled masterpieces
of technology only just
barely holding back
the lethality of space. I
don’t say this to scare
you, but to prepare
you. Exploration
is wonderful and
amazing, and yet
my crew and I are
always on our guard,
trusting each other to
follow regs and safety
protocols so if one of
us has a really bad day,
we don’t all end up as
space dust.
THE FINAL FRONTIER
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
75
permanently damaged, and the crew will be exposed to
a likely fatal dosage of electromagnetic radiation. GRBs
are also known to cause extinction events on planets;
if a local star system is hit directly with a GRB it will
obliterate all life on the surface and any life up to 1 meter
underwater. Subsurface life will be mostly protected
though will have to deal with a reduced atmosphere and
disruption to the food chain.
: . BAJORAN WORMHOLE
COMMUNICATIONS
: . Supernovae
When a star reaches the end of its life, the balance be-
tween radiation pressure and gravitational pressure is no
longer stable. There is now no fusion processes happen-
ing which means there is no radiation pressure to “hold
up” the surface of the star. If sufficiently massive, the
star’s outer layers will begin to collapse down. Eventually
they will reach a point where the star’s mass is so dense
that it cannot be compacted further and the outer layers
“bounce” off the central mass and radiate back out to the
Galaxy. Due to the rarity of massive stars, these events
do not happen often, but if caught within a dozen or so
light years a ship would be exposed to a high density of
radiation particles.
SCIENCE OFFICER’S LOG: JADZIA DAX
(STARDATE 48589.4)
Deployment of our subspace communication relay
through the Bajoran wormhole has not been without
incident. Once again, the Bajoran prophecies have given
our progress pause, though it appears to have benefited
our progress. A small amount of silithium seemed to
threaten the wormhole’s stability but instead it created
a subspace filament that stabilizes the communication
relay. Reviewing the data from the mission is proving
to be trickier than normal. The comet fragments during
deployment have added background noise to the scans.
Additionally, there are high amounts of neutrino emis-
sions in the data, which appear to be elevated compared
to the standard wormhole emissions but not outside
of the noise range to flag anything of interest. I have
deployed continuous monitoring sensors for the next 50
rotations to ensure the relay is stable.
CONTINUOUS THREATS
While exploring the Galaxy, there are a number of astro-
nomical bodies and events providing a continuous threat
to your ship and crew. Most of these are predictable and
easily mitigated, but in an emergency there may not be
time to account for these risks. These threats can also
exacerbate other events that were not predicted. When
troubleshooting issues on the ship or on a surface expe-
dition, engineers and scientists should consider these
threats as potential complexities.
rays begin to degrade the external systems and hull
integrity. This degradation is not catastrophic, but it is
a weakening factor that must be considered in regular
maintenance.
: . Cosmic Rays and
Radiation
Cosmic rays are a generalized term for radiation parti-
cles that permeate interstellar space. Their origin may
be from high-energy radiation from the center of other
galaxies, solar winds, supernovae or other violent events
that occur throughout the universe. Even though the lat-
ter examples are transient one-off occurrences, it’s the
combination of all of these happening at great distances
on a regular basis that creates a standard background
of radiation. While ships are all outfitted with material
that shields the crew from the majority of this radiation,
over years or even decades of space travel these cosmic
: . Solar Wind
While cosmic rays are a constant background source
of radiation no matter where one is in the Galaxy, when
traveling within a solar system solar wind is a much
greater factor and risk. Solar wind is a term that captures
the high-energy radiation particles emitted from the
home star. A planet may protect itself from the majority
of this radiation by having a magnetic field. Without
a magnetic field to redirect these charged particles,
the atmosphere will be blown away and thus become
inhabitable. A starship’s standard outfitting should be
sufficient to protect from background solar wind, but
care must be taken when crew are on away missions to
the surface of worlds where a protective magnetic field
does not exist. While the effects are not immediate, if a
crew member spends too long on an exposed surface,
or goes on regular exposed missions, they will begin to
exhibit radiation poisoning.
76 CHAPTER 3
: . CHAPTER 3.5
SPACETIME AND SUBSPACE
“Found a subspace fissure. Should make
it possible to complete the scan.
- Cleveland Booker
IN THE LATE 19TH CENTURY, EARTH
mathematicians began exploring the
idea that our universe was a four-di-
mensional fabric: three dimensions of
space and one dimension of time. The
three spatial coordinates are able to be
controlled but time progresses forward
at one second per second and can not
easily be manipulated.
In the early 20th century, Earth physicist
Albert Einstein explored this concept
further and looked at ways that mass
affects the shape of spacetime. The
easiest way to conceptualize this is that
the fabric of spacetime is like a tram-
poline, and masses like planets or stars
cause spacetime to warp, as if there is a
bowling ball on the trampoline.
The more massive an object is the
more difficult it is to travel through the
universe on the surface of spacetime.
The lighter an object is the easier it is to
move through spacetime. Particles with
no mass, such as light or neutrinos, sim-
ply coast on the surface of spacetime in
a straight line. If they encounter gravita-
tional wells from other massive objects,
they will curve and find the shortest pos-
sible path. This effect when considering
light is called gravitational lensing and
can be used in myriad ways on large or
small scales. If there are objects that do
not emit electromagnetic radiation but
have a gravitational presence, it may
be detected through the gravitational
lensing of background stars. Examples
of these could be pockets of dark matter,
or cloaked ships.
LIEUTENANT
ZOE HERNANDEZ
The fundamental
physical process of
the universe that
has enabled deep
space travel and
communication is
rooted in the concept
of spacetime. Let
me bend your brain
about it a bit.
WARP DRIVE
On the surface of the fabric of space-
time, it is impossible to travel faster than
the speed of light. By taking advantage
of the fact that spacetime itself is not
limited, warp drives build a bubble of
spacetime around the ship and allow
that to propel the ship faster than the
speed of light. If higher speeds are
required, it is possible to build a bubble
around the first one, which is consid-
ered a subsequent warp factor. Building
a bubble of spacetime requires a high
amount of energy generated from matter/
antimatter reactions in the warp core.
: . Dilithium
The purpose of dilithium in the warp
core is to regulate the matter/antimatter
energy generation processes. The warp
core utilizes deuterium and anti-deuteri-
um as the fuel source. When combined,
these two annihilate one another and
generate massive amounts of energy,
used to build a warp bubble from the
surrounding spacetime. If left unregu-
lated, the mixing chamber runs the risk
of a positive feedback loop which would
catastrophically destroy the ship from
the rapid release of energy.
THE FINAL FRONTIER
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
77
WORMHOLES
Another method of shortcutting the vast distances in
space is through a wormhole. Imagine the fabric of
spacetime is all laid out flat, but locally there are bumps,
ridges, and some parts even folded over each other. A
wormhole is a hole that connects two points in space-
time, basically punching a hole between points that are
folded over each other. It is important to note that be-
cause two points are connected in the four-dimensional
fabric of spacetime, a wormhole may connect two points
in space, or two points in time (a temporal vortex) or a
combination of both spatial distance as well as time.
SUBSPACE
WHILE WE TALK ABOUT SPACETIME AS A “SHEET”
that dictates motion and gravity, “subspace” is consid-
ered the area above and beneath that sheet. The surface
of spacetime limits communication to the speed of
light, but these laws don’t exist outside of that sheet of
spacetime. The Federation and subsequently Starfleet
have developed subspace communication buoys which
: . MIDAS ANOMALY
CAPTAIN’S LOG: CAPTAIN KATHRYN JANEWAY
(2378; STARDATE 54683.1)
We are now in somewhat regular communication with
Starfleet via the Pathfinder program. Using the Mutara
Interdimensional Deep Space Array System, thankfully
shortened to the “MIDAS array”, we are sending and
receiving data packets with Earth via hyper-subspace
technologies. Communication and delivery is still irreg-
ular but the crew morale seems to be improving with
every reminder that Earth is there and cheering us on.
However, I now get to put on my science officer train-
ing to record a hopefully not-unique incident related to
the data packet recovery. Commander Tuvok has been
diligently reviewing the data packets himself since the
Maquis corruption nearly threatened the stability of
our ship. This recent delivery, thankfully, was clear for
delivery but Tuvok noted a unique signature embedded
in the spectra. Though Tuvok is reluctant to see beyond
coincidence I’m baffled that this data would appear
78 CHAPTER 3
Wormholes may be naturally occurring or artificially
generated. In order to artificially generate a worm-
hole, the technology requires a vast amount of energy.
Traditionally, it is simply the presence of mass that can
affect the shape of spacetime. In lieu of sufficient mass
one can take advantage of the mass-energy equiva-
lence rule (E=mc2) to use high amounts of energy to
manipulate the shape of spacetime (i.e., warp drive or to
generate a wormhole). Due to the fact that a wormhole
is breaking the laws of causality through enabling travel
between two points in time, residual particles in the form
of tachyons or chronometric particles will be detected. A
surge of tachyons as a by-product of causality fractures
may indicate an imminent formation of a wormhole.
can pierce the sheet of spacetime and enable faster-
than-light communication. The limitation of this tech-
nology is that the buoys must be strategically placed
throughout the Galaxy and signals emitted through them
dissipate as the distance squared, so they must be close
to one another and exist for there to be any hope of
communication.
again when both of us are on a ship together. Not only a
ship assignment, but that we would find this particular
signature while stranded halfway across the Galaxy.
Over ten years ago I sent Tuvok data from a subspace
relay anomaly I had uncovered thinking that a minor con-
nection to Vulcan would help solve the mystery. While
we weren’t able to uncover the source of the signal, we
did confirm its similarity to the anomaly logged back in
2151. It just so happens that this surge of energy has
appeared again, this time fractions of a second before
the delivery of our data packet from Starfleet. Could it
be the use of the MIDAS array? Decades of subspace
communication has rarely seen this effect so there must
be something new to the network that could cause
this. Thankfully the hyper-subspace technology is more
complex than standard subspace comm relays so there
is a chance we have more data for analysis this time.
Tuvok and I will continue to work on this mystery as well
as send our information back to Starfleet.
: . CHAPTER 3.6
ALTERNATE UNIVERSES
“But there is a theory in quantum physics that all
possibilities that can happen, or could happen,
do happen in alternate quantum realities.
- Data
WHEN CONSIDERING THE COSMO-
logical address, you may note the
largest identifiable “location” is our
universe. But what could exist outside
of our universe? We talk about the fabric
of spacetime as dictating the laws of
how fast objects can move and where
they exist within our own universe. Is it
possible there are other universes out
there to explore? As far as Starfleet is
concerned, there have been potential
encounters with alternate universes,
though accessing them consciously is
still beyond technological capability.
THE TERRAN UNIVERSE
One of the first logged encounters
with alternate universes has been with
what is called the Terran Universe.
Conceptually, this is the alternate
universe easiest to comprehend. Going
back to the trampoline analogy of
spacetime, the Terran universe could be
considered the “other side” of the tram-
poline where all the alternate paths are
taken and what is considered “good” is
“bad.” The laws of physics still exist and
mirror our own universe. Accessing this
alternate universe is also the simplest
(though not through conscious means)
as various technologies such as warp
drive, subspace buoys, and wormholes
manipulate known spacetime increasing
the risk of a rupture and possible con-
nection to the Terran Universe.
LIEUTENANT
ZOE HERNANDEZ
As if this universe
and the many layers
of subspace and
spacetime weren’t
enough, we have
evidence of alternate
universes and
alternate timelines as
well! Let’s talk about
the multiverse.
QUANTUM MULTIVERSES
One concept of multiverse theory is the
brane. This is where you can think of
different universes as individual sheets,
but zooming out reveals multiple layers
of sheets (or branes) all stacked on top
of one another. It is nearly impossible
to access these multiverses except
through rifts in spacetime. The nearest
brane multiverses to our own are the
most similar and therefore only small
changes may be detected.
technologies, in the case of alternate
universes it is used to indicate those
where a decision or rift has spawned
or opened a connection to a similar but
slightly different universe. These types
of multiverses are exceedingly rare due
to the law of the conservation of energy
but have been identified and known to
exist in unique circumstances. Typically
a rift in spacetime which is naturally
occurring or artificially generated due
to a technological anomaly can open a
pathway to these alternate universes.
While the term “quantum” is frequently
misplaced when discussing advanced
THE FINAL FRONTIER
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
79
: . U.S.S. CERRITOS BUOY
INSTALLATION
Ens. Rutherford: “Engineering log: Ensign Rutherford.”
Ens. Tendi: “And Science log: D’Vana Tendi!”
Rutherford: “Tendi, come on, let me record mine first!”
Tendi: “We can do it together! That way all the informa-
tion is in one spot!”
Rutherford: “Ooh, smart! Okay…Engineering AND
Science log: Ensigns Rutherford and Tendi of the U.S.S.
Cerritos. We were rebooting a major subspace commu-
nications buoy today…”
Tendi: “…It serves as a major hub for an entire sector of
communications!”
Rutherford: “And…something weird happened.”
Tendi: “Yeah, so when we reset the relay and got it up
and running again…or so we thought…”
Rutherford: “My implant went all wiggly!”
Tendi: “Rutherford couldn’t see for a while out of the
implant and we had to do a hard reset to get it working
again. While he was figuring that out, I went through the
data logs and saw a huge energy surge in the buoy right
after we got it online!”
Rutherford: “It spiked out the calibration hardware, AND
we couldn’t see any EM radiation signal at all.”
Tendi: “So it’s not like someone was trying to send a sig-
nal. Thankfully, we had some extra stuff with us, because
I love looking for tachyon surges…”
Rutherford: “…and I love neutrino emission…”
Tendi: “So we looked in our data and we saw both of
those! Tachyons and neutrinos, but no electromagnetic
signal, and no unique spectral data other than that initial
surge. And screwing up Rutherford’s implant! I had the
idea to go through past Starfleet science logs, cross-
referencing ‘subspace buoy’, ‘anomaly’, and ‘data’…but
couldn’t find anything.”
Rutherford: “So I thought to add ‘surge’…”
Tendi: “…and we got a hit! Not only has this been logged
a few times, but Janeway found it twice. ADMIRAL
Janeway!”
Rutherford: “With both tachyons and neutrinos, but no
EM spectrum…it looks like the installation of subspace
buoys results in some form of time anomaly, maybe
we’re seeing a microwormhole form?”
Tendi: “Ooh, microwormholes! We’ll look into it more.
Maybe we’ll get to meet THE Admiral Janeway!”
Rutherford: “That’s it for now, log. Thanks for listening!”
TOBIAS RICHTER
80 CHAPTER 3
: . CHAPTER 3.7
TIME TRAVEL
“Oh, the almighty Temporal Prime Directive; take my
advice, it’s less of a headache if you just ignore it.
- Admiral Kathryn Janeway
TO UNDERSTAND THE DELICATE NA-
ture of time travel, one must explore
the nature of non-linear dynamics,
also sometimes called chaos theory.
In simple terms, non-linear dynamics
look at the propagating effects that
happen when small changes occur to
starting conditions. This is applicable
to time travel in the sense that when
someone travels to the past, they will
make seemingly insignificant changes
to the starting conditions that eventually
will become the future from which they
came. Sometimes these small changes
do not end up having significant effects
and will be essentially background noise
in the eventual timeline.
Any time travel will carry with it the
risks of knock-on effects and potential
universe-ending paradoxes. Depending
on the circumstances of the mission, it
may seem that the presence and inter-
ference of the crew is intentional. This is
otherwise referred to as a pre-destina-
tion paradox, that the crew was meant
to go back in time to ensure the stability
of the original timeline. While these
events are certainly possible, they must
be evaluated with great care as inten-
tional interference could be disastrous.
Other times, however, they can propa-
gate and lead to massive divergences
in a timeline. The further back in time
travel, the greater the risk that small
changes will cause a deviation in events.
If small changes have been made due
to the presence of time travellers, care
must be taken to realign the starting
conditions as much as possible.
While time travel assignments are rela-
tively rare, it is still important to acknowl-
edge the effect that these missions
may have. As one carries out missions
in the past, it is important to consider
the non-linear dynamics implications
of changes made. This is also referred
to as the Butterfly Paradox, wherein
small changes can result in significant
effects. Regarding time travel, consider
each decision made and the potential
implications on the future.
LIEUTENANT
ZOE HERNANDEZ
Some of the earlier
sections alluded to time
travel, so let’s delve
more deeply into the
topic. Unless we’ve done
so already? I don’t think
so. Did we? Gosh, the
Department of Temporal
Investigations is gonna
come have a chat with
me soon, I’m sure.
Unless they did already
and I just forgot?
THE FINAL FRONTIER
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
81
TYPES OF TIME TRAVEL
The following is a non-exhaustive list of potential meth-
ods for time travel your crew may encounter. Note that if
one category or incident sends the crew back or forward
in time, it is possible to utilize an alternate method for
reversing the time travel, depending on what resources
are available to you.
: . Temporal Fractures
Occasionally in the exploration of our universe, you may
discover a rift in spacetime. Different from a wormhole,
these rifts are difficult to detect and their behavior is
unpredictable. These may occur from high-energy
incidents that result in a tear, an anomalous fold in
spacetime, or a tear due to a change in a timeline that
disrupted the fabric of reality. Restoring the fracture
through actions or physical repair may return your crew
to the original reality.
: . Wormholes
As described on page 78, wormholes are a connective
tunnel through two points in spacetime. While most ad-
ventures utilize wormholes to create distance shortcuts
in space, the fabric of spacetime also includes coordi-
nates that account for time differences. Whether the
wormhole is artificially generated or naturally occurring
in the Galaxy, the crew may inadvertently find themselves
in both a different space and time. If the wormhole is
stable, traveling back through should take the crew back
to your original coordinates, allowing for the natural pro-
gression of time while you have been away.
: . Time Particles
On your adventures, it is possible to encounter parti-
cles that have a connection to time. Species who have
the capability to interact and manipulate time, rare
though these are, have been known to possess crystals
that allow the user to traverse different points in time.
Depending on the user and their capability, these crys-
tals could also be considered omnitemporal artifacts.
: . Gravitational
Time Dilation
Gravitational wells are distortions in spacetime due to
the presence of a massive object such as a planet or a
star. There are two methods for using gravitational wells
for distorting time: gravitational dilation and slingshots.
Dilation is a natural process in which the deeper one
is into a gravitational well, the progression of time is
slowed down compared to those outside the well. For
standard planets, these effects are negligible, though
some anomalies have been recorded in the past.
Additionally, chronitons are rare particles named
for their ability to travel through time coordinates.
Interaction with chronitons may also send the user to a
different point in time, though typically this is with less
control than actions performed with crystals.
: . BUOY INSTALLATION
Gravitational temporal slingshots combine the effects
of gravitational time dilation with spacetime distor-
tions from the production of warp bubbles. Standard
gravitational slingshots simply utilize wells to alter a
ship’s momentum (direction and speed) with negligible
effects on the starship. When the ship goes to warp
while in the process of a slingshot around a gravita-
tional well, these temporal effects are heightened and
the ship may be flung through a spacetime fold to new
time coordinates.
SCIENCE LOG: LTJG SILVIA TILLY
“Today we were tasked by Admiral Vance to assist with
re-installation of subspace buoys. Since dilithium is a
key power flow component to their connection with
subspace, all faster-than-light communications via
this system were destroyed by The Burn. Now that we
have a steady supply of dilithium (thanks to the Verubin
Nebula) we can start rebuilding the Federation comms
network. Anyway, today I was working on Buoy 0831A
and while activating the dilithium I noticed a surge ema-
nated across the network. I couldn’t find any recordings
in past Starfleet technology about this, what little is left,
but I wonder if setting up these buoys can permeate
across space and time? I mean, it is in subspace, so it’s
possible to—Oops! That’s the Admiral. Gotta head to a
meeting; back soon!”
82 CHAPTER 3
: . Omnitemporal Beings
and Artifacts
Throughout the Galaxy, Starfleet has stumbled across
species and objects which have the capability to
transport themselves to any point in space or time.
These include (but are not limited to) the Q Continuum,
the Guardian of Forever, and the Bajoran Orb of Time.
Caution should be taken with any interaction with these
individuals as they may control your own timeline with-
out warning. Rumors also abound regarding Temporal
Agents from the 31st century who monitor and repri-
mand any adjustments to timeline and time travel.
TACHYONS
TACHYONS ARE UNIQUE PARTICLES THAT, AS OF THE
21st century, were still wholly theoretical. While normal
mass causes spacetime to bend and dip like a bowling
ball on a trampoline, tachyons possess what is called
“negative mass” that inverts the shape of spacetime.
Due to this inversion, tachyons always travel faster
than the speed of light. They are nearly impossible to
consciously detect due to the inverted causality: as
RHYS YORKE
 TEMPORAL PRIME
DIRECTIVE
Starfleet holds in high regard the Temporal Prime
Directive and it is expected that all Starfleet personnel
and starships will comply. This directive states that all
measures to prevent and avoid timeline manipulation
shall be taken. Personnel must take all precaution to not
interfere with historical events and must endeavor to
maintain the known timeline.
soon as you look for them, they would have already
arrived. However, as humanity and fellow members of
the Federation developed technology for manipulating
spacetime, the detection of tachyons became more
standard. It requires an acceptance that they will pre-
date events occurring that will affect time, such as the
formation of a wormhole.
THE FINAL FRONTIER
83
CHAPTER 4
REPORTING FOR DUTY
4.1 Player Characters 86
4.2 Character Lifepath 97
4.3 Creation in Play 142
4.4 Supporting
Characters 144
4.5 Talents 148
4.6 Character
Development 166
MATHEUS GRAEF
85
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
86
: . CHAPTER 4.1
PLAYER CHARACTERS
“Sometimes the universe allows
for the making of unexpected memories.
- Captain Philippa Georgiou
DOCTOR VORAAL
I am the Challenger’s
chief medical officer,
Doctor Voraal. I have
been told one of the
most enjoyable aspects
of a roleplaying game
is creating an original
player character and
telling their story with
the other characters
your group creates.
Star Trek Adventures
provides two methods
of creating characters:
lifepath and creation in
play. It would be logical
for all the players in your
group to use the same
method so everyone
gets the same play
experience.
THE GALAXY IS FILLED WITH CHARAC-
ters of all kinds who populate its worlds,
crew its starships, and interact with
one another in all manner of ways, both
mundane and dramatic. To represent
this abundance and diversity, characters
are composed of several elements that
depict how that individual interacts with
the universe, both in game and story
terms. These elements are attributes,
departments, focuses, values, traits,
talents, and pastimes and, together,
they paint a picture of who the character
is, what they’re good at, and how they
view the universe.
The term “character” applies to both
player characters (those controlled
by players) and non-player characters
(NPCs, characters controlled by the
gamemaster), even though NPCs are
treated differently in some respects.
Characters are divided into two types and
two subtypes for the purposes of play:
§ Player characters consist of all the
characters used by a player to partic-
ipate in the game. Player characters
are split into main characters and
supporting characters, but what-
ever type of character it is, while it
is being controlled by a player, it is a
player character.
§ Main characters can be thought
of as the main cast of a Star Trek
series or movie. They’re the ones
who appear in most episodes and
have the biggest impact upon
the story. Each player controls a
single main character. Each player
decides how their main character
acts in the scenes framed by the
gamemaster.
§ Supporting characters, like
main characters, are controlled
by the players. However, there is
no fixed list of supporting char-
acters; a supporting character is
created when needed to provide
assistance in difficult situations,
or to allow a player to take part
in a scene if their main character
is busy elsewhere. Supporting
characters are seldom as complex
as main characters, to allow them
to be created swiftly, but a group of
players may find they want to bring
back favorite supporting charac-
ters time and time again, allowing
them to develop and grow into
more fleshed-out individuals. For
more details see SUPPORTING
CHARACTERS, on page 144.
§ Non-player characters (NPCs) are
all characters not controlled by the
players. They’re introduced and
played by the gamemaster, though
if an NPC is friendly to the players’
characters, the gamemaster may al-
low the players to play that NPC dur-
ing tense situations. For more details
see NON PLAYER-CHARACTERS,
starting on page 346.
The elements comprising a character
are described in the following sections.
CHAPTER 4
 Who Are You?
Countless stories can be told within the Star Trek uni-
verse, and not all of them revolve around the senior staff
of a Federation starship.
When starting a game of Star Trek Adventures, you
should convene your group in a Session 0 and figure
out the style of game everyone wants to play. It does no-
body any good if the gamemaster has one kind of game
in mind, and the players have another.
Some groups may be fine with the default presumption
that the player’s main characters are the senior staff
of a Starfleet ship, mirroring the format of most of the
series—but others may wish for a different approach.
Specialized problem-solving teams within a ship’s
crew, or groups of lower-ranking officers, may be more
comfortable for some groups, in which case ignore the
section of these rules that asks the players to choose a
character role (see page 135). Similarly, some groups
may wish to play as civilians, just making their way
through the Galaxy, or as part of a different civilization
such as the Klingons, Romulans, or Ferengi.
Other styles of game are touched upon in this book and
receive focus in other Star Trek Adventures supplements.
: . Traits
A character possesses one or more traits, one of which
is the character’s species. Traits are descriptors of im-
portant parts of the character, in a single word or a short
phrase. Alongside a character’s values—which cover the
character’s personality, motivations, and beliefs—traits
help define what the character is and what they can do.
Character traits can be employed in the same way as
traits for a location or situation, such as to increase or
reduce the Difficulty of tasks.
Different species vary in subtle ways, both biologically
and culturally, and a trait encapsulates those many little
differences. Traits are positive or negative, and influence
both how the character interacts with their environment
and how characters interact with one another.
A character may obtain additional traits because of
things that happen to them during character creation—
life-changing events that define the character going
forward—and characters may occasionally gain more
during play. This may be something about the character,
such as a disability or impairment the character suffers
from, or the influence of some external force, such as
the impact of a harrowing experience.
There is no fixed number of traits a character can have
beyond their species trait. Traits, and their effects upon
play, are detailed on page 250.
EXAMPLE: Lt. Commander Keyla Detmer has the
traits Human, Cybernetically Enhanced, Starfleet
Officer, and Time-Displaced. The first is her species:
anything that affects a Human in a specific way, or for
which being Human is advantageous or problematic,
is impacted by this trait. The second reflects the fact
she received cranial and ocular implants after injuries
sustained when the U.S.S Shenzhou was destroyed.
The third is her status as a Starfleet officer. The fourth
reflects the fact she was born in the 23rd century, but
now lives in the 32nd century.
: . Values
When a character is created, you create several values:
short statements describing the attitudes, beliefs, and
convictions of that character. These are not simple opin-
ions, but the fundamental structure of the character’s
morals, ethics, and behavior. Values define who a charac-
ter is as a person, why they behave the way they do, and
what drives them during times of struggle and hardship.
§ Values should be easy to understand, so you and your
gamemaster can judge when they’re helpful, when
they’re a hindrance, and when they don’t apply.
§ You’ll want to have at least one value that causes you
trouble, holds you back from taking certain actions,
or compels you to act, as these are useful for helping
you gain Determination.
§ You’ll want at least one value which is helpful to your
character, or which represents them at their best. These
create opportunities for you to spend Determination.
§ Your values should change over time. Because they
can change, don’t worry too much about choosing
the perfect values right away; start simple, and let
them develop.
§ Your values can contradict one another. A person
could hold conflicting beliefs, and the situations
when those conflicting beliefs clash is often a source
of drama and tension during the game.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
87
Control
Daring
88
§ Beyond that, a character’s values can be anything, but
they should reflect a character’s deeply-held beliefs,
their principles, their self-identity, or the relationships
that define them (whether those relationships are
to another person, a group, or even an institution or
culture).
A character’s values could be shaped by their back-
ground, their training, or their upbringing. Many Starfleet
officers are motivated by an intense curiosity about the
universe that drives them to explore, or by a powerful
sense of duty to help or protect others. A character may
be scrupulously honest, unwilling to deceive others, or
have a strong sense of personal honor which cannot
allow them to cheat or employ unscrupulous methods. A
character may be motivated by powerful loyalty to a par-
ticular group or organization, by the ambition to achieve
some feat or attain some status, or by resentment or
animosity for another group.
EXAMPLE: Captain James T. Kirk has four values,
which define the core of his personality. These are:
“Doesn’t believe in a no-win situation,” “There’s no such
thing as the unknown—only the temporarily hidden,”
“Married to the Enterprise,” and “Risk is our business.”
: . Attributes
Each character is defined by six attributes. They embody
the character’s intrinsic physical and mental capabilities
and the ways they prefer to approach problems. These at-
tributes are Control, Daring, Fitness, Insight, Presence,
and Reason. Each attribute has a rating which determines
its measure, with higher numbers reflecting greater abil-
ity. For humanoids, these attributes range from 7 to 12,
with 8 representing average capabilities. Non-humanoid
creatures may have attributes across a broader range,
and special abilities that increase their attributes further.
These are just a few possibilities, but they should
provide guidance about how to think about and create
a character’s values. Examples of values are provided
throughout this chapter, and there is a larger list of sam-
ple values on page 96. How values are used in play is
described on page 262.
A character may encounter situations for which more
than one of their attributes is applicable. In these cases, it
is important to consider the context of the situation, and
how the character is choosing to approach the problem.
The gamemaster may choose which attribute is most
applicable to a situation if more than one could be used.
ATTRIBUTES AND THEIR SUGGESTED USES
Control is about the character con-
trolling themselves, and covers preci-
sion, accuracy, and careful timing. It
can rely on self-discipline and control of
one’s emotions to ensure mechanistic
precision, or it can be a mixture of fine
motor skills, coordination, and familiarity
with the activity.
A character might use Control when:
§ Performing precise or delicate work.
§ Performing a task that involves exact timing or accuracy.
§ Giving detailed instructions.
§ Resisting mental assault, duress, or other stressful situations through
an orderly mind and the application of discipline.
§ Taking deliberate, measured actions to complete a task.
Daring comes into play whenever a
character reacts to a new situation
without doubt, hesitation, or caution. It
covers circumstances where characters
take decisive action without a detailed
plan or analysis and relies on gut in-
stinct and quick reflexes.
A character might use Daring when:
§ Responding to an emergency.
§ Attempting to evade or resist some form of immediate danger.
§ Acting aggressively.
§ Acting based on instinct or reflex.
§ Resisting mental assault, fear, or panic through stubbornness
and defiance.
CHAPTER 4
Fitness
Insight
Presence
Reason
Fitness is about enduring hardship and
employing force. It covers physical condi-
tioning, general health and well-being,
fortitude, and endurance.
Insight is about understanding people
and their feelings and being open to
different ideas and ways of thinking. It
covers self-awareness, being conscious
of a creature’s current state of mind, and
hard-earned wisdom, and relies upon a
person’s emotional intelligence, empa-
thy, and experiences.
Presence is power of personality, and
the ability to command attention or
respect. It’s used for being diplomatic
during negotiations, giving orders dur-
ing a crisis, and even being charming
or seductive.
Reason is about logic and meticulous
analysis. It covers forming hypotheses
and intricate planning, as well as recol-
lection of intricate facts and calculation
of complex variables. Reason relies on
keen observation and a thorough com-
mand of the facts.
A character might use Fitness when:
§ Attempting to employ raw physical force to a situation.
§ Performing some strenuous or tiring physical activity.
§ Trying to resist, or act despite the effects of, some physically debilitating
condition, such as poisoning, disease, and extremes of environment.
A character might use Insight when:
§ Attempting to understand the feelings of another creature.
§ Trying to determine how another creature might think or act, to antici-
pate or predict its actions.
§ Trying to overcome their own judgements and preconceptions.
§ Attempting to calm or reassure others.
§ Allowing past experiences and instinct to discern changes in the envi-
ronment around them.
A character might use Presence when:
§ Attempting to sway the mood or opinion of others through emotive
language and rhetoric.
§ Trying to keep others calm and focused during a stressful situation.
§ Resisting duress or manipulation by others by maintaining a strong
sense of self.
§ Presenting a specific appearance or demeanor to others, appropriate to
the circumstances.
§ Seeking to capture and command attention through speech and behavior.
A character might use Reason when:
§ Studying and analyzing unfamiliar phenomena and coming to a hypoth-
esis about them.
§ Researching a complicated subject, or otherwise interpreting large
amounts of information.
§ Trying to sway the opinion of others through facts and logic.
§ Attempting to perform complex calculations.
§ Using observation and rational thought to anticipate and discern
changes in the environment around them.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
89
 Fitness and Strength
A Vulcan, known for having strength far superior to that
of even a strong Human, does not have a higher Fitness
rating. Rather, the disparity in strength is represented
through the Vulcan’s species trait. Were a Human to try
to arm-wrestle a Vulcan, there would be no test or chal-
lenge involved: the Vulcan would simply win, because
the Vulcan is several times stronger.
: . Departments
In addition to the six attributes, each character is
trained in six departments, which encompass the
broad roles Starfleet personnel and those like them
are expected to be proficient within. Each department
is rated from 0 to 5, with each rating representing
some differing level of training, expertise, and natural
aptitude. All main characters have at least a 1 in every
department, as they’re assumed to have at least a basic
level of training in every field.
Thus, for characters who have considerable innate
strength, or similar physical advantages such as speed,
the difference is shown in the Difficulty of a task, or
whether the task needs to be attempted in the first
place. A Human may need a Fitness + Conn task with
a Difficulty of 2 to successfully run cross-country and
reach their destination in time. A Kelpien would find the
same task easier, and the Difficulty for the task will be
lower or they may not even need to roll.
The six departments are Command, Conn, Engineering,
Security, Medicine, and Science—representing the
departments aboard a Federation starship. It’s worth
noting that many of the departments overlap in a few
ways. Each department covers perception, social inter-
action, and knowledge to some extent, but which depart-
ment is most applicable to any of those things depends
on circumstances more than anything else—a character
with a high Security rating is adept at spotting ambush-
es and other dangers but may be less adept at analyzing
probe telemetry or experimental data.
These advantages don’t necessarily carry over into
combat. Hitting an opponent in melee is more a matter
of skill—of knowing how to apply and deliver force to an
opponent—and split-second decision-making (covered
by Daring) than about raw strength. To give an example,
Mr. Spock is not one who often throws a punch, and
that kind of aggression normally only comes out of him
in moments when he is not in control of himself. His
strength does not really translate into making him a
more effective fighter.
This can differ if a character wishes to restrain an oppo-
nent. An opposed Fitness + Security task would be a
fine way to handle pinning an opponent in place to keep
them from escaping, and that kind of task is one where
enhanced strength is a significant asset.
As explained in Chapter 7: Operations, when asked to
perform a task, the rules or the gamemaster dictate a
single attribute and a single department—players may
suggest alternate options, though the gamemaster’s
word is final—and add their ratings together. This is
the target number for that task, and each die that rolls
equal to or less than this number scores a success. If
the character also has an applicable focus, any die that
rolls equal to or less than the chosen department rating
scores an additional success; if there’s no applicable
focus, any die that rolls a 1 scores an additional success.
The following matrixes present suggestions on how
each attribute might interact with each of the six
departments.
: . Department Ratings
DEPARTMENT EFFECT
0 Untrained, unskilled, lacking in innate aptitude
1 Basic training, rudimentary skill, or a raw but undeveloped aptitude
2 Professional competence, from a combination of training and talent
3 Experienced and well-trained, or an aptitude developed through study and training
4 Excellence within the field, achievable through dedication and experience
5 Exceptional, often a combination of intense training, hard-won experience, and natural aptitude
90
CHAPTER 4
ATTRIBUTE AND DEPARTMENT INTERACTIONS
Command covers a wide range of interpersonal interactions, especially leadership, negotiation, and both coordinating
and motivating others. It also includes resisting coercion, as well as helping others resist fear and panic.
Conn
Engineering Command
§ Control, to coordinate a group of subordinates care-
fully and precisely, or to give detailed orders.
§ Daring, to make a split-second command decision,
or to resist fear or coercion.
§ Fitness, to coach others performing the same phys-
ical activity or to coordinate a group (such as several
people moving a heavy load).
§ Insight, to judge the mood and morale of a group of
subordinates, or to try to assuage the fears of a group.
§ Presence, to rally or inspire others during a difficult
situation, or to command the attention or respect of
someone hostile.
§ Reason, to consider and evaluate the orders given by
a superior, or to find a solution to a difficult diplomat-
ic or legal situation.
Conn covers piloting craft of all sizes, from ground vehicles and shuttles to grand starships. It also includes navigation—
both on the ground and in space—and an understanding of starship operations, including the procedures and cultures of
space travel and exploration.
§ Control, to direct a starship or other vessel through a
difficult environment, or to operate a craft with such
precision as to aid someone else’s activities.
§ Daring, to direct a starship or vessel to avoid a sudden
and imminent danger, or to perform extreme or unor-
thodox maneuvers with a craft using 'feel' or 'instinct'.
§ Fitness, to move effectively in an environment suit,
including through zero-gravity, or resisting the dele-
terious effects of extreme acceleration or unpredicta-
ble motion without an inertial dampening field.
§ Insight, to judge the nature or intent of another ves-
sel by the way it is moving or determining the source
of a problem with a familiar vessel.
§ Presence, to maintain professional decorum and
etiquette when representing your ship or Starfleet in
formal circumstances, or to argue effectively over a
matter of starship protocol, or a course of action.
§ Reason, to plot a course through a difficult environ-
ment, or to determine their location or the location of
someone else based on available data.
Engineering covers inventing, understanding, designing, repairing, and maintaining technology, as well as using any
technology not specifically covered by another department.
§ Control, to adjust or repair a sophisticated device or
system, or to operate extremely complex devices like
transporters.
§ Daring, to make improvised repairs to a device in an
adverse situation, or to improvise a technical solution
to a problem by using technology in an unusual,
innovative, or reckless manner.
§ Fitness, to perform physically taxing, repetitive, or
arduous technical activities as efficiently as possible
despite physical strain, or to perform a technical
activity reliant on the application of physical force.
§ Insight, to make an educated guess about unknown
or extremely unfamiliar technology, or to try to under-
stand the behavior of artificial creatures.
§ Presence, to explain in an engaging manner an
extremely complex technical problem or solution
to someone with less engineering knowledge, or to
argue the merits of a specific approach to a problem
with another engineer.
§ Reason, to study the designs of a device or system
and gain additional understanding of its function, or
to design a new device or system from scratch.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
91
Science Security
Medicine
92
Security is the use of force during combat—making attacks, essentially—as well as observing and analyzing threatening
situations and watching for potential perils. It also encompasses interrogation and intimidation, stealth and infiltration, as
well as an in-depth knowledge of weaponry, combat styles, and strategy. It also covers survival skills and athleticism.
§ Control, to attack an enemy from a distance, or to
stay unseen or unnoticed when moving among hos-
tile creatures.
§ Daring, to attack and defend in melee combat, or
to scare or intimidate someone with the threat of
violence.
§ Fitness, to restrain an unwilling prisoner, or to climb
or swim in difficult circumstances.
§ Insight, to judge whether an individual is a threat to
you or your allies, or to discern if there is the poten-
tial for an ambush or trap.
§ Presence, to question someone suspected of a
crime, or to impress upon someone the danger of a
course of action or decision.
§ Reason, to identify the participants of a battle by
studying the aftermath, or to devise a plan for a dan-
gerous situation, be it combat, wilderness survival,
infiltration, or some combination thereof.
Medicine is the understanding of the physical and mental makeup of life-forms, including a knowledge of ailments and
diseases that might befall them, the injuries and stresses they can suffer, and the methods for treating those maladies in
a wide range of species.
§ Control, to perform delicate procedures, such as
surgery, or to talk someone else through providing
medical attention.
§ Daring, to provide emergency medical attention on a
patient who is in imminent danger of death, or when
resisting fear or panic to protect a patient.
§ Fitness, to resist the effects of poisons and dis-
eases by knowing how to respond to exposure, or
to move or restrain a patient without exacerbating
their injuries.
§ Insight, to diagnose a patient’s illness or injury from
a description of the symptoms, or to provide thera-
peutic care for a patient who is traumatized.
§ Presence, to convey to a stubborn or unwilling patient
the seriousness of their case or the necessity of the
treatment, or to speak on a patient’s behalf about their
case to convince others of a specific course of action.
§ Reason, to diagnose a patient’s illness from a
thorough examination, or to research an unknown
disease, procedure, or treatment.
Science is the understanding of numerous fields of scientific study, both on a theoretical level, and in terms of their prac-
tical applications. This does not just cover hard sciences like physics, chemistry, and biology, but also social sciences like
anthropology and psychology. It also covers the application of the scientific method to situations.
§ Control, to perform a delicate experiment, or to
guide someone else through an experimental or
complex procedure.
§ Daring, to devise a solution to a scientific problem
without sufficient proof or adequate testing before-
hand, or to gather data or perform an experiment
under extremely hazardous conditions.
§ Fitness, to analyze data while fatigued or otherwise
suffering from some physical hindrance, or to resist
the effects of radiation or other environmental phe-
nomena by knowing how to protect against exposure.
CHAPTER 4
§ Insight, to gain useful data from witnesses or the
subjects of a study, or to devise a rough working
hypothesis from incomplete data.
§ Presence, to explain in an engaging manner an
extremely complex scientific problem or solution to
someone with less scientific knowledge, or to argue
the merits of a theory with another scientist.
§ Reason, forming a hypothesis from available informa-
tion, or performing research on an unfamiliar subject.
CARLOS CABRERA
: . Stress
Every main character (and some supporting characters)
has a limited ability to withstand stress, resist conse-
quences, and avoid Injuries during dangerous situations.
: . Focuses
The departments characters are trained in are broad;
focuses allow a character to demonstrate expertise in
a narrower field, representing expertise stemming from
deeper study and practical experiences. Focuses are
not tied to any specific department and can be applied
to any task a character attempts, so long as the focus
would logically benefit the task being attempted.
A main character can sustain a maximum amount of
Stress equal to their Fitness attribute; your choice of
species, talents, and other factors may affect this max-
imum. Each time your character faces a consequence,
you may choose to suffer Stress instead of accepting
the consequence. This is described in full in Stress and
Avoiding Injury, on page 292.
Main characters have six focuses. Each focus should
be narrower than the six departments the character is
trained in, but they shouldn’t be so narrow as to never
come up in play. Further, because there is no specific
link between departments and focuses, a focus may
be valuable for tasks covering more than one depart-
ment—for example, a focus in Astrophysics could easily
be used for Science tasks, but it also has potential uses
when trying to plot a course using Conn.
Pages 94 and 95 present a list of sample focuses. This
list is by no means exhaustive—there are countless
potential focuses you could create and use in game.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
93
: . Sample Focuses
COMMAND CONN ENGINEERING SECURITY MEDICINE SCIENCE
Art Astronavigation Advanced
Holograms Ambush Tactics Alternative
Medicine Animal Behavior
Bargain Astrophysics Cybernetics Blade Weapons Anesthesia / Pain
Management Anthropology
Composure Atmospheric
Flight
Deflector
Systems Camouflage Biotechnology Archaeology
Courting Rituals Boat Pilot /
Submersibles Diagnostics
Chemical and
Biological
Weapons
Counseling Astrometrics
Cultural Expert Climbing Electro-Plasma
Systems Combat Medic Dentistry Biochemistry
Debate Combat
Maneuvers
Emergency
Repairs
Computer
Security Systems
Emergency
Medicine
Biology /
Xenobiology
Deception Communication
Systems Energy Weapons Criminal
Organizations Ethics Botany /
Xenobotany
Diplomacy Evacuation
Procedures EVA Suits Crisis
Management Field Medic Catastrophism
Emotional
Intelligence Evasive Action Experimental
Device (specify)
Deflector
Operations First Aid Chemistry
Etiquette Extra-Vehicular
Activity
Flight Control
Systems Demolitions Genetics Deflector
Operations
Gambling Flight Controller Forcefields Espionage Guided Therapy Ecology
History Ground Vehicles Imaging
Equipment
Evacuation
Procedures Imaging Systems Geology
Inspiration Guidance
Systems
Impulse
Fundamentals Fleet Formations Immunology Laboratory
Maintenance
Intimidation Helm Operations Jury-Rigging Forensics Internal Medicine Marine Biology
Journalism Impulse Engines Locksmith Hand Phasers Kinesiology Meteorology
Law Power
Management Manufacturing Hazardous
Environments
Medical
Toxicology Microbiology
Linguistics Precision
Maneuvering
Mining
Operations Interrogation Microbiology Physics
Mental Discipline Repairs and
Maintenance
Modeling &
Design Intimidation Neuropsychology
/ Psychiatry Prototyping
Multi-Discipline Ship Design and
Construction
Percussive
Maintenance Lead Investigator Parapsychology Quantum
Mechanics
Negotiation Shuttlebay
Management Propulsion Martial Arts Patient Care Rapid Analysis
Persuasion Small Craft Reverse
Engineering
Mental
Resistance
Techniques
Pediatrics Research
94
CHAPTER 4
: . Sample Focuses (continued)
COMMAND CONN ENGINEERING SECURITY MEDICINE SCIENCE
Philosophy Space Station
Operations Saboteur Phasers Pharmacology Sensor
Operations
Politics Starfleet
Protocols Salvage Pickpocketing Psychiatry Sociology
Prime Directive Starship Expert
(pick one)
Sensor
Calibration Security Systems Psychoanalysis
Specific
Historical Time
Period
Rhetoric Starship
Recognition
Shuttlecraft
Maintenance
Ship Engagement
Tactics
Psychosomatic
Disorders
Starfleet
Programming
Starfleet
Protocols
Stellar
Cartography
Structural
Engineering
Ship Lockdown
Procedures Rheumatology Subspace Theory
Station
Operations Subspace Theory Subspace
Mechanics Small Unit Tactics Stress Disorders Temporal
Mechanics
Strategy / Tactics Survival System
Maintenance
Specific Species
Weapon(s) Surgery Terraforming
Teaching Tracking Transporters /
Replicators Strategy Triage Unified Field
Theory
Team Dynamics Warp Drive Troubleshooting Targeting
Systems
Veterinary
Medicine
Unorthodox
Mathematics
Time
Management Zero-G Combat Warp Core
Mechanics Torpedoes Virology Warp Theory
: . Talents and
Special Rules
Talents are additional benefits a character possesses,
defining areas of specialty, the advantages of their
personal approach to circumstances, and other decisive
abilities. These take the form of a bonus—extra d20s, re-
rolls, bonus Momentum, the ability to use a different de-
partment in a situation, and so forth—that applies when
the character is performing types of tasks or taking an
approach to a situation.
Many talents have one or more specific requirements.
These are conditions that must be fulfilled before
the talent can be selected, such as belonging to a
specific species, or having a department at a specific
rating or above. Character talents are listed starting
on page 149.
A character may also receive game benefits from
Species Abilities and Role Benefits. These function
similarly to talents, but are provided by a character’s
species or their role and cannot be selected as talents.
NICK GREENWOOD
REPORTING FOR DUTy
95
: . Sample Values
A good mystery is irresistible To boldly go where no one has gone before
Act with confidence, even if you don’t feel confident Seeking to find myself far from home
All’s fair in love and politics Always up for an adventure Build relationships Good leaders get their hands dirty I finish what I start Information is power Listen to opposing viewpoints Loyalty matters most Patience is a virtue Resistance is never futile Sometimes you have to take a leap of faith Spoiling for a fight Spring into action Teamwork makes for success The mission comes first Willing to sacrifice myself to save my crew Get them before they get you We are stronger united than apart My knowledge is giving you a fighting chance Within the shadows, you are free to move The daily grind is worth it Universal law is for lackeys The crew is my family I care too much about what people think of me Friends are the family you choose We are nothing without order and justice My lies are the truest of all stories Well-placed words are deadlier than a phaser You can’t let them know what you value With proper discipline, anything is possible Technology is simpler than people Always find ways to be useful People are more than flesh and blood Never hide who you are Admirals don’t intimidate me
Experience will earn me that promotion
Humility is the best path to honesty
"Weird" is part of the job
I can make something from nothing
Sensors can’t tell you everything
Exploration is the blood that fills my veins
Push me too far and you’ll see my ugly side
Adaptation is survival
Never leave a stone unturned
The Academy taught me 10 percent of what I know
We are all connected despite being worlds apart
Keep a smile on your face no matter how you feel
Crew comes first
Diplomacy is the first and last solution to anything
Our best defense is knowledge
First contact? Sign me up!
Space really wants us dead
I will not fight for Starfleet, but I will defend its ideals
I fix what is broken
I do not like hijinks
Do better, be better
I'm a good bad influence
Everyone deserves a second chance
Some things don't deserve forgiveness
Sometimes hope is a choice
We didn't come out here to play God
I study war to learn from the best
I am surrounded by a team I trust
The only way to defeat fear is to tell it "No"
Starfleet to the core
Layer yourself in subtleties
Every puzzle has a solution
I am my own keeper
96
CHAPTER 4
: . CHAPTER 4.2
CHARACTER LIFEPATH
“Ever since I was a child, I’ve always known exactly
what I wanted to do: be a member of Starfleet.
Nothing else mattered to me.
- Captain Jean-Luc Picard
THE LIFEPATH CONSISTS OF SEVEN
steps, with each step allowing a new
choice from a list of options. As a player
works through each step of the lifepath,
the results are added on to the character
being created. In this way, the character
takes shape stage by stage.
While this option presents the steps as
a series of tables with results generat-
ed by dice rolls, players may choose to
ignore any or all the results rolled, or
even to not bother rolling at all. In this
way, the system never stands in the way
of a desired character concept. Some
players may begin the process knowing
exactly what kind of character they want
to create, while others may have part of
an idea and use random rolls to fill out
the details.
Anyone wanting to create a character
should have a character sheet. A blank
sheet can be found on page 371.
Sheets can also be downloaded from
the Modiphius website. It is possible
to just use plain paper, but a character
sheet presents the information in an
orderly fashion. Also, it’s a good idea
to use a pencil when writing down in-
formation during character creation, as
elements are subject to change during
the process.
 Choosing Values
Several stages of the lifepath require
you to create a value for your char-
acter. This is sometimes easier said
than done: coming up with a suitable
phrase on demand isn’t always easy.
If you can’t come up with a value for a
certain stage, make a note to deter-
mine a value for that stage, and move
on. You can go back and fill in that
value later, even leaving it until the very
end of character creation, depending
on when inspiration strikes. Review the
list of sample values on the opposite
page and use one or more listed there,
or use them as inspiration to create
your own.
If players struggle to come up with
a value during character creation,
consider adopting the method used
for creation in play (page 142), and
leave values blank even once play has
begun, defining them only as needed
during the game.
DOCTOR VORAAL
The default method of
creating a character in
Star Trek Adventures
is the lifepath.
This is a series of
steps representing
important events of the
character’s life, and
the way those events
shape the character’s
nature is reflected
in the mechanical
choices each step
presents. In essence,
your character’s life
prior to the start of
the game will be fully
detailed by the end of
the lifepath process.
If this is how you wish
to proceed, read on. If
you would rather use the
creation in play method,
skip to page 142.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
97
LIFEPATH SUMMARY
Step one: Species
Begin with a rating of
7 in each attribute and
1 in each department.
Choose the character’s
Species (see page
100–page 113). Each
species grants:
§ A species trait
§ +1 to each of three
attributes
§ A unique Species
Ability
page 99 page 99
Step Five: Experience
Choose how long the
character’s career has
been so far—are they
young and inexperienced,
a seasoned veteran, or
somewhere in between?
The character gains:
§ One value
§ One talent
page 127 page 127
Step Two: Environment
Choose the character’s
Environment; this is the
type of world the charac-
ter was raised on. Each
Environment grants:
§ A value
§ +1 to one attribute and
+1 to one department
page 115 page 115
Step Six: Career Events
Determine two or
more Career Events.
Regardless of how many
events are chosen, the
character gains:
§ Two points for
attributes
§ Two points for
departments
§ Two focuses
page 128 page 128
Step Three: Upbringing
Choose the character’s
Upbringing; this is the
kind of education the
character had during their
formative years and the
kind of influence their
parents and mentors had.
Each Upbringing grants:
§ +2 to one attribute and
+1 to a second attribute
§ +1 to a single
department
§ One focus
§ One talent
page 117 page 117
Step Seven:
Finishing Touches
The character gains:
§ One value
§ +1 to two attributes
§ +1 to two departments
§ One talent
§ One or more pastimes
§ Adjust attributes and
departments that go
above the maximum
ratings for each.
§ Record derived
ratings—Stress and
bonus damage, if
any—plus the charac-
ter’s name, pronouns,
rank, character role,
department, and start-
ing equipment.
page 132 page 132
Step Four: Career Path
Choose the character’s
Career Path. In the case
of Starfleet characters,
choose which track of
the Academy they join:
Command, Operations,
or Sciences. Each Career
Path grants:
§ One trait, reflecting
their profession
§ One value
§ Three points to spend
on two or three
attributes
§ +2 to a single depart-
ment, +1 to two other
departments
§ Three focuses
§ One talent
page 120 page 120
98
CHAPTER 4
STEP ONE: SPECIES
NOTE THE STARTING RATINGS FOR YOUR CHARAC-
ter’s attributes, and then choose which Species the
character is from.
: . Choosing a Species
The choice made at this stage of the lifepath is the char-
acter’s Species. Each species provides the following
benefits:
All characters begin with a rating of 7 for each attrib-
ute. These are increased by the character’s Species, and
then by later stages of the lifepath.
A finished character may not have more than 12 in any
attribute and may only have one attribute at 12. However,
during the character creation process, the character
may end up with a higher attribute than this; this is cor-
rected at the end of character creation.
All characters begin with a rating of 1 for each depart-
ment. These are also increased during the lifepath.
A finished character may not have more than 5 in any
department and may only have one department at 5.
However, during the character creation process, the
character may end up with a higher department than this;
this will be corrected at the end of character creation.
§ ATTRIBUTES: Each species lists three attributes. Add
1 to each listed attribute.
§ TRAIT: The character gains a single trait, which is the
character’s chosen species. This reflects the quirks,
strengths, and weaknesses applying to all members
of that species because of their physiology, culture,
and shared history. Each species entry provides
examples of how that trait may impact situations. A
trait may also serve as a prompt for the gamemaster
to affect a character differently because of a poison,
disease, or other hazard.
§ SPECIES ABILITY: Each species provides a talent
in the form of a Species Ability, which reflects some
unique aspect of their physiology, psychology,
or culture. You automatically receive this talent.
Species abilities cannot be selected after character
creation. These are distinct from talents which have
a particular species as a requirement, which are
always optional.
 Mixed-Heritage Characters
Many Starfleet officers have parents from different
species. To create mixed-heritage characters, choose
two species (one for each parent), and then select one
of those two as the primary species—the species which
the character takes after the most. Characters may have
more than two species, if one (or both) of their parents
are mixed heritage, but in game terms, select only the
two most prominent species of all of those the character
is descended from.
character gains the species traits of both parent species
and counts as a member of both species for the purpos-
es of talent requirements. The gamemaster may rule on
any game mechanics that may conflict: for example, a
part-Andorian, part-Aenar character might not be blind,
but their other senses may not be as heightened.
The character is treated as a member of the primary spe-
cies for attribute bonuses and their Species Ability. The
EXAMPLE: Spock is half-Human and half-Vulcan but
takes after his Vulcan side more. He has the Vulcan
and Human species traits and increases his attrib-
utes as if he were a Vulcan. He chooses the Vulcan
Species Ability.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
99
Species Details Species Details
100
ANDORIAN
An aggressive, passionate people from the frozen
moon Andoria, the Andorians have been part of the
Federation since its foundation. Their blue skin, pale
hair, and antennae give them a distinctive appearance,
and while the Andorian Imperial Guard was demobilized
when the Federation was founded, they still maintain
strong military traditions, and a tradition of ritualized
honor-duels known as Ushaan, using razor-sharp
ice-mining tools.
Andorians have developed powerful traditions of ritual,
convention, and personal honor to help direct their
intensity and energy towards constructive ends.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Thy’lek Shran (Enterprise),
Jennifer Sh’reyan (Lower Decks), Ryn (Discovery)
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ I always repay my debts
§ No challenge unmet
§ Proud child of Andoria
§ Question my word, question my honor
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Control, +1 Daring, +1 Presence
TRAIT: Andorian. This trait may reduce the Difficulty of
tasks to resist extreme cold, or tasks impacted by ex-
tremely low temperatures. Their antennae aid in balance
and spatial awareness; a lost antenna can be debilitating
until it regrows. Andorians also have a high metabolism,
meaning, among other things, that they tire more quickly
than Humans; this also makes them more vulnerable to
infection from certain types of injury.
or “th” for males. This is placed before the family name,
separated by an apostrophe.
INTENSE (SPECIES ABILITY): When you succeed at a
task where you purchased one or more d20s by adding
to Threat, you generate 1 bonus Momentum for each
d20 purchased. Bonus Momentum may not be saved.
ANDORIAN NAMES: Andorian names tend to be
harsh-sounding, and have a personal name followed by
a clan name. It's common to begin the clan name with a
gender-specific prefix: “zh” or “sh” for females, and “ch”
§ FEMININE: Athytti, Vryvih, Zyle, Vyssia, Thriras,
Shreri, Vrossaan, Itamaan, Ishrelia, Vreraat, Talas
§ MASCULINE: Ishrath, Thoss, Shon, Oshrev, Atheth,
Tyvaass, Thasiv, Tyssab, Tylihr, Thy’lek, Shras, Thelev
§ CLAN NAMES: Tharhat, Qiaqir, Chiaqis, Thenehr,
Zynes, Raviq, Thilrerh, Azonan, Azollarh, Shran
§ EXAMPLES: Ishrelia zh’Azonan, Atheth th’Zynes
CHAPTER 4
STEVE STARK
AENAR
The Aenar are a subspecies of Andorians originally
native to an isolated region of the northern wastes of
Andoria. Though typically blind, they are telepathic,
and their other senses are heightened. Once believed
to be a myth, the Aenar are few and most prefer to
remain within their isolated settlements, and they
rarely bother themselves with matters outside their
own communities. They lack the distinctive blue skin
pigmentation of other Andorians, instead having skin
tones that range from white, to ice blue, to pale gray.
Aenar deplore violence, and commonly follow a strictly
pacifist ideology.
Compared to their Andorian kin, Aenar often seem calm
and restrained. They are no less proud of their heritage,
but they express that pride differently, often taking great
pride in their skills and the work they do. The few Aenar
who leave their homeworld often come off as highly mo-
tivated and sure of themselves, maintaining their sense
of self even when far from their families.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Jhamel (Enterprise),
Hemmer (Strange New Worlds)
Species Details Species Details
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ Do not mistake my blindness for helplessness
§ I perceive things your eyes do not
§ Life is incomplete without purpose
§ Pacifism is not passive
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Control, +1 Insight, +1 Presence
TRAIT: Aenar. Biologically similar to Andorians, Aenar
differ in a number of ways. Aenar are typically blind, but
their other senses are heightened to a degree that more
than compensates for their lack of sight. They are also
telepathic which further contributes to their awareness
of their environment. Aenar are typically pacifists, and
thus may be reluctant, or even outright refuse, to carry
out violent acts.
TELEPATHIC (SPECIES ABILITY): Aenar can sense the
minds of other living creatures in their vicinity, and can
read the thoughts of others, though they have strict ta-
boos about reading a mind without permission. See the
Telepathy talent on page 156 for more details.
AENAR NAMES: Aenar names are much like Andorian
names (see opposite page), though the Aenar place less
emphasis on their clan names.
ARIEL OREA
REPORTING FOR DUTy
101
Species Details Species Details
102
BAJORAN
A spiritual, dauntless people from the planet Bajor, the
Bajorans lost much after decades of occupation by
the Cardassian Union. Many Bajorans were scattered
across the Alpha Quadrant as they fled the Occupation,
while those who remained on Bajor often toiled in
labor camps or fought as insurgents. The Occupation
ended in 2369, but the scars it left will take generations
to heal. Bajor sought membership in the Federation
soon afterwards (though this application was delayed
by the Dominion War), but many Bajorans have found
their way into Starfleet. Bajoran culture places a strong
belief in the Prophets, celestial beings who are said to
have watched over Bajor for millennia; modern religious
doctrine states the Bajoran wormhole is the Prophets’
Celestial Temple.
Bajoran spirituality has long been a powerful factor in
their lives, even for Bajorans who did not believe strongly
in the Prophets. The unifying presence of their religion
provided a source of hope and courage. A common sign
of this faith is the D’ja pagh, a symbolic earring.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Kira Nerys (Deep Space
Nine), Lt. Shaxs (Lower Decks)
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ I help others to be closer to the Prophets
§ Survival at any cost
§ We are in the hands of the Prophets
§ You cannot explain faith to those who lack it
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Control, +1 Daring, +1 Insight
BAJORAN NAMES: Traditional Bajoran names begin
with the family name, followed by a personal name,
though some diaspora Bajorans place their personal
name first as is common in many other cultures. Bajor
is traditionally matriarchal, with children taking their
mother’s family name.
TRAIT: Bajoran. Bajorans tend to be hostile towards
Cardassians, and resentful of those who are dismissive
of, or turned a blind eye to, the suffering of the Bajoran
people. While not all Bajorans are spiritual or religious to
the same degree, most have a cultural understanding of
the Prophets’ place in their society.
THE WILL OF THE PROPHETS (SPECIES ABILITY): You
may find strength in the Prophets even when the situation
is dire: once per adventure, when the gamemaster spends
3 or more Threat at once, you gain 1 Determination.
§ FEMININE: Adami, Chami, Fala, Jaxa, Laren, Lipras,
Leeta, Lupaza, Meru, Neela, Nerys, Seriah, Sul, Yesa
§ MASCULINE: Anaphis, Edon, Essa, Furel, Gel, Holem,
Hovath, Kag, Los, Mabrin, Nalas, Reon, Taban, Tennan
§ FAMILY: Anbara, Anjohl, Faren, Jaro, Kalem, Krim,
Kubus, Latara, Latha, Lenaris, Li, Tahna, Reil
CHAPTER 4
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
BETAZOID
The peaceful Betazoid people hail from the idyllic, ver-
dant world Betazed. The world has long been a valued
member of the Federation, and its people can be found
across Federation space, including Starfleet. Betazoids
appear almost identical to Humans but differ in one ma-
jor way: they are naturally telepathic, developing mental
abilities during adolescence. The potency of this ability
varies between individuals.
Due to their widespread telepathy, Betazoids have a
culture of honesty and directness—there is little reason
to be evasive or deceitful in a culture where everyone
can read your mind and sense your emotions. Among
non-telepaths, and even telepaths of other species, this
can result in some Betazoids seeming blunt or even
rude. Betazoids who spend a lot of time among other
cultures tend to either lean into this notion or choose to
temper their honesty with tact.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Deanna Troi (The Next
Generation), Lon Suder (Voyager)
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ A lie is a story told in bad faith
§ Do not be what others expect you to be
§ I can feel your pain
§ I’m just saying what you’re thinking
Species Details Species Details
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Insight, +1 Presence, +1 Reason
has either Telepathy or Empathy (see page 155-page
156 for more details). Part-Betazoid characters general-
ly have Empathy rather than Telepathy.
TRAIT: Betazoid. All Betazoids are telepathic to varying
degrees, and even when not actively using their abili-
ties, they are highly perceptive of others around them,
but also highly sensitive to telepathic disturbances and
mental assaults. They have little familiarity with lies
and deception, due to their open culture and ability to
read the thoughts and emotions of others. As they are
sensitive to the minds of other living beings, they tend
not to be comfortable around animals, for fear of losing
themselves in the minds of wild creatures. Similarly, they
can find species immune to telepathy to be off-putting.
BETAZOID NAMES: Betazoids tend to have names
with at least two syllables and a melodic sound, with
a personal name followed by a family name. Betazoids
are traditionally matriarchal, with children taking their
mother’s family name.
TELEPATHIC (SPECIES ABILITY): Betazoids can sense
the minds of living creatures in their vicinity and can
read the thoughts and emotions of others. Each Betazoid
§ FEMININE: Deanna, Ania, Kestra, Lwaxanna, Dalera,
Gloranna, Abeana, Pekera, Nissila, Lomestra, Ioza
§ MASCULINE: Konal, Reban, Xani, Enon, Dael, Etas,
Andal, Kolel, Atani, Devoni, Algar, Jensar, Nikael
§ FAMILY: Grax, Hagen, Morganth, Stadi, Dutrax, Odutan,
Nelan, Onovren, Kader, Nostrun, Dulas, Konin, Ebesin
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
REPORTING FOR DUTy
103
Species Details Species Details
104
CARDASSIAN
Often vilified and distrusted due to the actions of their
government, Cardassians have a reputation for being
ruthless, deceitful, and aggressive. Due to a dearth of
natural resources and an economic collapse, Cardassian
culture was overtaken by an oppressive authoritari-
an regime dominated by the military, which began a
decades-long campaign of expansion, conquest, and
exploitation, including the occupation of Bajor and a
lengthy border conflict with the Federation. In the after-
math of the Dominion War, with the military government
overthrown, the rebuilding of Cardassia was a difficult
process, not least because of long-held feelings of
resentment towards the Cardassians.
Cardassians are a creative, dedicated people, with a
strong cultural fascination with intrigue. Cardassians
are inclined to keep secrets, and to regard suspicion as
wisdom, and the uncovering of secrets is regarded as a
valuable skill.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Elim Garak (Deep Space
Nine), Seska (Voyager)
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ Everyone is guilty of something, but who and of what?
§ State above family; family above self
§ If you don't want me knowing, hide it better
§ All my stories are true, especially the lies
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Control, +1 Presence, +1 Reason
TRAIT: Cardassian. Cardassians are a pseudo-reptilian
species, used to an environment somewhat warmer and
more humid than is comfortable for Humans, and tend
to find bright light uncomfortable. Their culture prizes
mental discipline and obedience to strict hierarchies
and they have a reputation for arrogance, cruelty, and
smug superiority.
CARDASSIAN NAMES: Cardassians follow a com-
mon pattern of personal name followed by family
name, though it is common for Cardassians to be
referred to by their family name more often than their
personal name, with personal names used by close
friends and family.
HEALTHY SUSPICIONS (SPECIES ABILITY): You may
add 1 Threat when interacting with an NPC to ask the
gamemaster if that NPC is lying about something. The
gamemaster must answer either Yes or No, and this
answer must be accurate, but the gamemaster does not
have to specify what the NPC is lying about.
§ FEMININE: Asha, Gilora, Iliana, Jil, Mila, Natima,
Rekelen, Siana, Ulani, Ziyal
§ MASCULINE: Aamin, Crell, Elim, Joret, Kotan,
Nanpart, Silaran, Tavor, Tekeny
§ FAMILY: Belor, Broca, Corak, Darhe’el, Dejar, Evek,
Ghemor, Jasad, Kovat, Lang, Malor, Marratt, Nador,
Preloc, Rillak, Thrax, Trepar, Vornar.
CHAPTER 4
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
DENOBULAN
Hailing from the planet Denobula, Denobulans are a
gregarious, inquisitive people who have been allies of
humanity since the 2130s. Denobulans are long-lived
and highly sociable, with large families—Denobulans
are typically polyamorous, with individuals potentially
having several spouses, each of whom may have several
spouses of their own, and dozens of children between
them—living in relatively close, communal environ-
ments. Culturally, Denobulans are an intellectually curi-
ous people, highly perceptive, and interested in a wide
range of philosophies, with their long lives allowing them
to pursue a wide range of fields of study, often granting
them unusual perspectives on the different philosophies
and fields of expertise they’ve studied.
Denobulans enjoy learning new things, meeting new
people, and they revel in the drama, intrigue, and gossip
that come from a rich and complex social environment.
They are extraordinarily patient, taking a long view of the
changes that happen in life, but they dislike solitude, and
even a busy starship or starbase can sometimes seem a
little empty to a Denobulan.
EXAMPLE CHARACTER: Phlox (Enterprise)
Species Details Species Details
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ You cannot truly learn about people unless you talk
to them
§ Comfort in numbers
§ There's always someone new to meet
§ My patience exceeds your stubbornness
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Fitness, +1 Insight, +1 Reason
DENOBULAN NAMES: Denobulans tend to only have
a single name—an individual Denobulan may be part of
several overlapping families. Some Denobulans may use
the name of one of their spouses as a surname; how-
ever, this is often to indicate association to species that
may not understand complex Denobulan families.
TRAIT: Denobulan. Denobulans have a robust immune
system, but a vulnerability to various forms of radiation
poisoning. They are adept climbers. Denobulans do
not need to sleep, but must hibernate for several days
each year, becoming disoriented if kept awake during
this period.
BREADTH OF STUDY (SPECIES ABILITY): You may
select two additional focuses.
§ MASCULINE: Biras, Bogga, Delix, Grolik, Groznik,
Nettus, Moga, Morox, Plox, Rinix, Takis, Tropp,
Tuglian, Vinku, Yolen, Zepht, Zinet
§ FEMININE: Anari, Andora, Asha, Daphina, Feezal,
Forliza, Kessil, Liera, Lusis, Miral, Natala, Ninsen,
Henna, Sabra, Secka, Symmé, Trevis, Vesena
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
REPORTING FOR DUTy
105
Species Details Species Details
106
FERENGI
An acquisitive species native to Ferenginar, the Ferengi
are unimposing beings, known mostly as merchants
and traders. Their culture promotes the accumulation of
material wealth, and their society is capitalistic, with most
routine activities accompanied by an exchange of money,
typically in the form of gold-pressed latinum (a non-rep-
licable liquid metal, suspended within “slips,” “strips,”
“bars,” and “bricks” of gold). Ferengi society is strongly
patriarchal, with female Ferengi traditionally disallowed
from owning property or even wearing clothing (and
male Ferengi often having deeply unpleasant attitudes
towards non-Ferengi women), though these attitudes
start to change by the late 24th century.
Ferengi pride themselves on their ability to acquire
wealth, though there are many different approaches
to this. For centuries, Ferengi culture has been domi-
nated by the philosophies and lessons of the Rules of
Acquisition, though these can be interpreted in a variety
of different ways and applied to a Ferengi’s life.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Quark (Deep Space Nine),
Nog (Deep Space Nine)
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ 9TH RULE: Opportunity plus instinct equals profit
§ 62ND RULE: The riskier the road, the greater the profit
§ 125TH RULE: You can’t make a deal if you’re dead
§ 263RD RULE: Never allow doubt to tarnish your lust
for latinum
THE GREAT MATERIAL CONTINUUM (SPECIES
ABILITY): Once per session, when obtaining additional
equipment, you may reduce the Opportunity Cost of an
item by 1, to a minimum of 0.
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Control, +1 Insight, +1 Presence
TRAIT: Ferengi. Ferengi physiology does not lend
itself to physical activity, nor does their culture value
such hardship, though they have a resistance to many
common diseases. Ferengi have exceptional hearing,
and highly sensitive ears, though this also means that
intense sounds (and physical force applied to the ears)
can inflict debilitating pain. Their unusual brain struc-
ture means that telepaths cannot read Ferengi minds.
Ferengi regard the accumulation of wealth as the
highest virtue, and while this has given them a reputa-
tion as cunning negotiators, they are also often seen as
duplicitous and manipulative.
FERENGI NAMES: Ferengi tend to have only a single
name, which tend to be only one or two syllables, though
exceptions exist. Among cultures who have family
names, Ferengi will occasionally refer to themselves as
“son of…,” “daughter of…,” “child of…,” and so forth, but
as each Ferengi is expected to make their own way in
life, family names are unheard of among Ferengi.
§ MASCULINE: Arridor, Berik, Bok, Broik, Frool, Gaila,
Gint, Gral, Letek, Nibor, Nog, Prak, Reyga, Tarr, Zek
§ FEMININE: Bralik, Delka, Ishka, Jubbletta, Leyari,
Lumba, Mes, Nandi, Nilva, Parilka, Pel, Prinadora
CHAPTER 4
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
HUMAN
Originating on the planet Earth in the Sol system,
Humans are a hardy and ambitious species, who went
from the brink of mutual annihilation to a united peace-
ful society in less than a century. A century after that,
humanity had established itself as part of an interplane-
tary alliance, the United Federation of Planets, bringing
former rivals together as allies. Humans often exhibit a
dichotomy in their nature—sometimes strongly emo-
tional and passionate like Klingons or Andorians, yet
at others highly analytical and rational like Tellarites or
Vulcans—which has allowed them to grow beyond their
warlike and fractious past, but their capacity for ambition
and aggression are as much a part of their success as
their curiosity and analytical minds.
Humans tend to draw upon two sets of cultural values.
As a central and founding member of the Federation,
the traditions and ideals of the Federation (or even those
of Starfleet) are often regarded as synonymous with
“Human culture” (though the Federation draws a lot
from each of its members), to the point where nobody
is entirely sure where Earth ends and the Federation
begins. Yet, conversely, this can also lead to Humans
finding value in preserving the traditions and cultures of
their pre-warp ancestors.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Ben Sisko (Deep Space
Nine), Kathryn Janeway (Voyager)
Species Details Species Details
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ I believe in what the Federation stands for
§ Learn something new every day
§ We are stronger together
§ Seek out new life and new civilizations
ATTRIBUTES: Add 1 each to any three attributes.
FAITH OF THE HEART (SPECIES ABILITY): When you
use one of your values to spend or gain Determination,
you may also add 1 Momentum to the group pool.
TRAIT: Human. Humans are adaptable and resilient,
and their resolve and ambition often allow them to
resist great hardship and triumph despite great adver-
sity. However, Humans can also be reckless, stubborn,
irrational, and unpredictable.
HUMAN NAMES: Players may use a variety of sources
for names, considering the vast range of real-world lan-
guages, cultures, and traditions to draw from.
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
REPORTING FOR DUTy
107
Species Details Species Details
108
KLINGON
Klingons are a proud, martial people, native to the
planet Qo’noS in the Beta Quadrant. Their tall, strong
physiques, sharp teeth, and the distinctive dense crest
that runs from their brow, over their heads, and down
their spines, all contribute to an appearance that is
synonymous with martial prowess and ferocity. Hardy
and aggressive, Klingons combine a sense of pride and
personal conviction with a fatalistic streak, regarding
honorable death to be preferable to what they would
deem a shameful or cowardly life.
Klingons embrace life and death alike without fear. They
are also a people with a powerful sense of honor, both
personal and familial, and they are quick to anger when
attacked; the greatest slights can result in genera-
tions-long blood feuds.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Worf (The Next
Generation), B’Elanna Torres (Voyager)
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ It is a good day to die!
§ Own the day!
§ Revenge is a dish best served cold
§ I am a Klingon warrior; if you doubt it, a demonstra-
tion can be arranged!
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Daring, +1 Fitness, +1 Presence
TRAIT: Klingon. Klingon physiology is hardy, with a
reinforced skeleton and many redundant internal organs
which allow them to withstand harm and numerous
toxins that would be deadly to other species, though this
has the potential for medical complications. They are
significantly stronger and more resilient than Humans,
though they have less tolerance for the cold.
ONE NAME: Klingons have only a single name, but
formal Klingon forms of address include the name of
a parent (“son of…,” “daughter of…,” etc.), and then the
name of their House—the extended family or clan they
belong to.
BRAK’LUL (SPECIES ABILITY): You gain 1 Protection
which stacks with the benefits of any armor worn.
Further, when another character attempts First Aid to
heal you, they may re-roll a d20.
§ FEMININE: Azetbur, B’Elanna, B’Etor, Bu’kah, Ch’Rega,
Doran, Gi’ral, Grilka, Huss, K’Ehleyr, Krelik, Kurak,
L’Naan, Lukara, Lursa, Mara, Miral, Sirella, Tavana
§ MASCULINE: A’trom, Barot, Chang, Gorkon, Huraga,
Maltz, M’Lind, Mogh, Pok, Kargan, Kang, Kerla, K’mpec,
Koloth, Kor, Korax, Ko’lek, Krell, T’vis, Toral, Torg, Klaa
CHAPTER 4
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
ORION
A species with a colorful reputation, the Orions are sub-
ject to rumor, speculation, and flights of fancy, to the point
where there are numerous common misconceptions
about their species and culture. This seems to be at least
partially by design. Orions are accustomed to taking full
advantage of any opportunity that passes their way, and
the uncertainty and misdirection that surrounds them is
a considerable advantage. The influence of Orion traders
and the Orion Syndicate can be felt across the Alpha and
Beta Quadrants, often in ways that flout the laws of other
cultures, and often employing agents of other species.
Orion culture appears to be divided along gender lines,
and there is evidence to suggest they have a broadly
matriarchal culture, with the women serving in leadership
roles, while Orion males more often serving as muscle,
laborers, and minor operatives, though this has shifted
somewhat over the centuries. This appears to be due to
a trait of some Orion females, who have been observed
to produce pheromones that can make male Orions (and
males of some other species, including Humans) com-
pliant. It isn’t known how widespread this trait is.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: D’Vana Tendi (Lower
Decks), Osyraa (Discovery)
Species Details Species Details
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ Everything has a price
§ Your expectations limit you
§ I am not who you expect me to be
§ I thrive because I do not ignore opportunities
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Daring, +1 Fitness, +1 Presence
TRAIT: Orion. Orions have similar environmental
tolerances to Humans and are physically and culturally
well-accustomed to interstellar travel. The Orions’ repu-
tation as thieves, pirates, and illicit traders can make oth-
ers wary of them, but it can also open doors and create
opportunities in more unsavory parts of the Galaxy.
ORION NAMES: Orions tend to be known by a single
name; separate personal and family names are known
to exist, but in most cases, an Orion will only use one
name—either a personal or family name, or a nickname
they’ve adopted—unless they need to distinguish them-
selves from another similarly-named Orion.
NEVER AT FACE VALUE (SPECIES ABILITY): Once
per scene, you may add 1 Threat to ask the gamemas-
ter a question about the situation, as if you had spent
Momentum to Obtain Information.
§ FEMININE: D’Nesh, Devna, D’Vana, Gaila, Maras,
Marta, Navaar, Osyraa, Shava
§ MASCULINE: Bashorat, Bri’onn, Harrad-Sar, Harral,
Ithor, Mesh, Paska, Shavo, Tolor
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
REPORTING FOR DUTy
109
Species Details Species Details
110
ROMULAN
A divergent offshoot of the Vulcan species, Romulans
fled their original homeworld millennia ago. These
Vulcans, “those who marched beneath the Raptor’s
wings,” refused to accept the teachings of Surak, and
thus did not embrace logic or stoicism, and even-
tually their ships would reach the worlds known as
Romulus and Remus. Much of what is known about the
Romulans has been pieced together from secondary
and tertiary sources, as the Romulans themselves are
secretive bordering on paranoia and do not disclose
any information about themselves unless they deem
it vital. Indeed, the Federation didn’t even know what
Romulans looked like until a century after the Earth-
Romulan War.
To the Romulans, trust is something to be placed in only
a few, for misplaced trust can be a deadly weapon. A
Romulan trusts only their closest family members, and
places increasing layers of secrecy, obfuscation, and
misdirection as relationships grow more distant. There
are exceptions to this, such as the scrupulously candid
order Qowat Milat, but most Romulans are highly guard-
ed and suspicious of everyone.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Elnor (Picard), T’Rul
(Deep Space Nine)
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ I give my life to the service of the Empire
§ Secrecy is a shield against betrayal
§ Every secret I discover is another weapon in my arsenal
§ Even my secrets have secrets!
PARANOIA (SPECIES ABILITY): When an action
scene begins, if the gamemaster wishes an adversary
to take the first turn, they must spend 1 Threat more
than normal.
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Control, +1 Fitness, +1 Reason
TRAIT: Romulan. Romulan physiology is like that of
Vulcans, but subtly different in a variety of ways, enough
to cause difficulties in using medical techniques
designed for Vulcans, and enough that, with difficulty,
sensors can distinguish between Vulcan and Romulan
life-signs. Psychologically and culturally, Romulans prize
cunning and strength of will, and are highly distrustful of
outsiders. Romulans have a reputation for manipulation,
deception, and betrayal.
ROMULAN NAMES: Romulans receive four names: a
“true” name used among family, a “common” name used
for religious rituals and other traditional purposes, an
“Imperial” name used by the state, and an “open” name
given to outsiders. A Romulan may even change their
“open” name on a whim and may have several in differ-
ent social contexts.
§ EXAMPLES: Almak, Ayel, Chulak, Donatra, D’Tan,
Hiren, J’Vini, Kabath, Laris, Livara, Lovok, Mirok,
M’Ret, Narek, Narissa, Neral, Nevala, Parem, Pel,
Rakal, Selok, Shira, Taris, Telek, Varel, Vreenak, Zani
CHAPTER 4
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
TELLARITE
The stubborn, argumentative Tellarite species originat-
ed upon Tellar Prime, a temperate planet in the Alpha
Quadrant. Their bodies are thick-set and covered in
dense hair, and they stand a little shorter than Humans
on average. Many male Tellarites possess tusks to some
degree, though they vary in size and prominence.
Tellarites are known to be highly argumentative, even
rude by the standards of other cultures, often com-
plaining frequently or insulting others as part of social
interactions. In truth, this comes from a sense of intellec-
tual honesty and rigorous skepticism. To a Tellarite, no
idea, concept or person is beyond challenge or analysis,
and any notion that cannot stand up to scrutiny is an
unworthy one. Tellarites revel in debates, and enjoy ar-
guing, and the criticisms, complaints, and insults issued
during conversations are intended to be met in kind: to
do otherwise is to display a weak character, an inability
to stand up for oneself, or an unwillingness to confront
one’s own flaws.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Jankom Pog (Prodigy),
Zus Tlaggul (Strange New Worlds)
Species Details Species Details
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ No notion is above proper scrutiny
§ No voice silenced, no perspective unheard
§ You’ll never get an answer if you don’t ask questions
§ An idea left unchallenged can be dangerous
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Control, +1 Fitness, +1 Insight
TELLARITE NAMES: Tellarites have considerable
variation in their names, but all tend to be composed of
harsh, even guttural sounds. Tellarite names consist of
a personal name and a family name, though the family
name is sometimes a compound, indicating the family
name is a patronym or matronym (the name of a father
or mother, respectively), toponym (derived from a place)
or similar.
TRAIT: Tellarite. Tellarites have keen senses of smell
and hearing, and excellent spatial awareness, allowing
them to judge distance, depth, and dimension with con-
siderable accuracy. They have a high tolerance for many
common drugs, toxins, and inebriants (Tellarites don’t
get drunk, just ‘feisty’).
STURDY (SPECIES ABILITY): You gain +1 Protection
against Stun Attacks only. Further, when you suffer a com-
plication that represents a physical hindrance or being
stunned, dazed, or disoriented, you may take 1 Stress to
ignore that complication (and remove any associated trait).
§ FEMININE: Pola, Cherthish, Zhuggaa, Torthem,
Neshlel, Verg, Kholo, Fratho, Skig, Vaolli, Glavom
§ MASCULINE: Prugm, Brag, Dash, Gisich, Gullerg,
Zankir, Hellek, Trar, Jankom, Jorsh, Geshniv, Tuk
§ PREFIXES: bav, glov, blasch, lorin, jav, bim, glasch
§ FAMILY: Gronnahk, Nonkursh, Slaal, Ker, Zhiv, Blav,
Zhuffand, Khebloss, Pend, Pog, Brin, Wenkurn
§ EXAMPLES: Pola jav Brin (Feminine), Tuk glasch
Khutohk (Masculine)
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
REPORTING FOR DUTy
111
Species Details Species Details
112
TRILL
The Trill are a pair of species who originate from a world
of the same name. The Trill that most outsiders know
appear almost identical to Humans or Betazoids, but for
a row of irregular spots running down the sides of their
bodies. The other Trill species are small invertebrates,
which dwell in subterranean caverns. There are rela-
tively few of this second species, species, but they are
extremely intelligent and capable of living for centuries.
While not a secret, it is not widely discussed that a small
portion of humanoid Trill are capable of bonding with the
invertebrates, commonly referred to as symbionts, and in
this bond—called a Joining—creates a gestalt person, a
combination of the minds, memories, and personalities
of both creatures. While a symbiont cannot be removed
without killing its host, upon a host’s death, a symbiont
will be passed to a new host, preserving knowledge and
memory over generations.
Trill society has been shaped by the Joined, with Trill cul-
ture tending to take a long view of social development,
and pursuing intellectual and philosophical develop-
ment over interpersonal conflict. The Trill are a firm and
dedicated member of the Federation.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Jadzia Dax (Deep Space
Nine), Gray Tal (Discovery)
PATIENT (SPECIES ABILITY): When you succeed at a
task where you purchased one or more d20s by spending
Momentum, you generate 1 bonus Momentum for each
d20 purchased. Bonus Momentum may not be saved.
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ Several lifetimes of experience
§ What will this mean a century from now?
§ What can I discover today?
§ Who I was is only part of who I am
TRILL NAMES: Trill names consist of a personal name
and a family name, though in the case of a joined
Trill, the family name is replaced with the name of the
symbiont.
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Control, +1 Presence, +1 Reason
TRAIT: Trill. Trill are especially resistant to parasites and
similar intrusion. However, they tend to have strong al-
lergic reactions to insect bites and other venoms, which
can disrupt their neurochemistry, especially if they are
Joined. Many of the specifics of Trill physiology—specifi-
cally with regards to symbionts—are not widely under-
stood by non-Trill doctors, which can result in medical
complications. Many Joined Trill find using a transporter
to be uncomfortable.
§ FEMININE: Audrid, Azala, Emony, Kareel, Lenara,
Nilani, Reeza, Zharaina, Koria, Lidra, Diranne, Kimoni
§ MASCULINE: Arjin, Bejal, Curzon, Hanor, Joran,
Tobin, Torias, Verad, Yedrin, Keman, Sabin
§ FAMILY: Nedan, Sozenn, Rulon, Les, Tral, Inazin,
Hama, Kelen, Imonim, Razix, Idiron, Paron, Tanan,
Sulil, Kerev
§ SYMBIONT: Jexen, Del, Ogar, Kyl, Eku, Nala, Cela,
Pohr, Ral, Okir, Etahn, Lahl
CHAPTER 4
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
VULCAN
The first species to contact Humans, Vulcans are stoic, ra-
tional people. Widely claimed to be emotionless, Vulcans
in fact feel emotions deeply and intensely, to their own
detriment. Ancient Vulcans were prone to murderous rage
and fits of paranoia, and nearly destroyed themselves mil-
lennia ago, before Surak taught logic and the purging of
emotion. His teachings led to peace among the Vulcans
and the establishment of a culture driven by reason.
Vulcans embrace science and logic, but their lives are
not purely devoted to such things: they have a deeply
philosophical and spiritual side, with art and music as
vital to their culture as logic. They are also an intensely
private people, with many aspects of their culture largely
kept secret from outsiders.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Spock (Star Trek), T’Pol
(Enterprise), Tuvok (Voyager)
SAMPLE VALUES:
§ Logic is the beginning of wisdom, not the end
§ Nothing that is, is unimportant
§ The needs of the many outweigh the needs of the
few or the one
§ In accepting the inevitable, one finds peace
Species Details Species Details
ATTRIBUTES: +1 Control, +1 Fitness, +1 Reason
TRAIT: Vulcan. Vulcans have a naturally high tolerance
for extremes of heat, are resistant to dehydration, and
can shield their eyes from blinding light with a set of
secondary eyelids. Their auditory and olfactory senses
are extremely keen, and the gravity of their homeworld
means an average Vulcan is about three times as strong
as a Human of similar size and weight. Vulcans are
innately telepathic, and through extensive training since
childhood, Vulcan minds can suppress their emotional
responses, and even exert influence upon biological pro-
cesses, though this takes regular meditation to maintain.
2 Stress to avoid suffering any trait that represents an
emotional state. However, if you become Fatigued, you
increase the Potency of any such emotion-related trait
by 1.
VULCAN NAMES: Vulcans have only a single name, in
practical terms—while they do have family names, these
are not discussed among other species—and tend to be
traditional in the names they use.
MENTAL DISCIPLINE (SPECIES ABILITY): While
Vulcans have some psychic capabilities, they require
training to use it effectively (see the Mind Meld talent,
page 154). Further, your maximum Stress is based on
your Control rather than your Fitness, and you may suffer
§ MASCULINE: Aravik, Delvolk, Kovar, Muroc, Rekan,
Salok, Savel, Sevek, Skon, Soral, Sutok, Syrran, Tekav,
Tolek, Velik
§ FEMININE: Falor, Metana, Perren, T’Karra, T’Laan,
T’Lar, T’Les, T’Mal, T’Paal, T’Pan, T’Rel, T’Vran,
Seleya, Simora, V’Lar
RODRIGO
GONZALEZ TOLEDO
REPORTING FOR DUTy
113
Borg Implants
Occipital
Implant
Dermal
Implants
: . Unusual or Unique
Characters
The Galaxy is a big place, with many worlds and a great
many people, all of whom with stories to tell. Even just
considering Starfleet alone, Starfleet Academy attracts
applicants from numerous worlds, including some that
aren’t a part of the Federation. With a suitable recom-
mendation, anyone can apply, though they’re still faced
with the same challenging entrance examinations that
ensure that only the best of the best become Starfleet
officers. People from all walks of life find themselves
travelling to distant worlds and encountering unusual
and interesting situations.
At the gamemaster’s discretion, players may seek to play
as any species, even going so far as to create unique
species never seen on screen. This requires a little more
work, but the results can be well worth the effort. The
player and gamemaster should confer as to the nature
of the species desired, get a rough idea of what that
species is capable of, what their culture is like, and so
forth, as well as why the character might seek to join
Starfleet. These provide the foundations for how to use
the species’ trait in play, as well as generating plot hooks
and ideas that can be explored further during play. The
gamemaster and player should also decide upon three
attributes, each of which are increased by +1, as well
as creating a Species Ability (these are comparable in
effect to a talent). You may also wish to create one or two
unique talents to reflect unique facets of that species’
culture, but this isn’t essential.
114
CHAPTER 4
AUGMENTS AND CYBORGS
In much of the Alpha and Beta Quadrants, the use of
genetic engineering is regarded warily. The Federation
has had laws restricting genetic manipulation since it
was founded, growing out of the devastating lessons
of Earth’s Eugenics Wars. The Klingons have their own
poor experiences with genetic engineering, and largely
regard genetic augmentation as a form of unearned
power, and deeply dishonorable. While genetics as a
science is not expressly outlawed, genetic engineering
of sapient life-forms is approached with caution and
heavily regulated.
In the more lawless regions of space, less scrupulous
genetic engineers pursue their craft free from what
they see as persecution, but the unrestricted nature of
their work often results in unforeseen side-effects, with
unrestricted tampering of the genome often resulting
in mental, emotional, or physical impairments, mutated
diseases, or other problems.
Another potential form of augmentation is using cy-
bernetics. These are not as strictly regulated, and the
Federation has fewer laws about the use of biomechan-
ical and biosynthetic implants, and there have been
numerous periods of history—particularly in the wake
of wartime—where people with cybernetic implants are
commonplace. Where possible, organic prostheses are
preferred, but these are not always available or viable,
so cybernetics are about as common as biosynthetic
replacements. While some augmentation is possible,
there are limits to what the body can withstand, and
an implant with capabilities far beyond what a body
can normally achieve are liable to place a body under
extreme stress or have other side-effects.
During character creation, you may define your charac-
ter as an augment, or a cyborg, adding the relevant term
as a trait to your character. The Augment trait means
that your character has had their genetics altered in
some way to enhance their capabilities. The Cyborg
trait means that your character has one or more artificial
organs or implants designed to either replace a lost
function (a prosthetic organ, a sensory aid, or similar)
or provide a capability you didn’t have before (such as a
neural implant). Discuss the nature of your character’s
augmentation with your gamemaster.
During character creation, you may also select one or
more Augment talents (page 155).
STEP TWO: ENVIRONMENT
REGARDLESS OF THEIR SPECIES, STARFLEET OF-
ficers come from many places, across many worlds. While
many Humans (for example) are born on Earth, there are
many more who were born on a colonized world else-
where in the Galaxy, or on a starbase or a starship.
A character’s Environment grants the character a single
value, one point in a single attribute, and one point in a
single department.
A player may choose their Environment, or randomly
determine it from the Random Environment table by
rolling a d20.
: . Random Environment
D20 ENVIRONMENT
1–3 Another Species’ World
4–6 Busy Colony
7–9 Frontier Colony
10–12 Homeworld
13–15 Isolated Colony
16–18 Starship or Starbase
19–20 Roll Again or Choose
: . Another Species’
World
The character grew up among another species. They
might have lived among a small enclave of their own
kind, or they may have been orphaned by some manner
of disaster and raised by aliens. Whatever the situation,
the character may have unique perspectives on their
own species and on those they were raised alongside.
§ VALUE: At this step, the character gains a single
value. This value should reflect the environment and
culture the character was raised within. Consider how
the character views their own culture, and how they
connect—or possibly, don’t connect—to the philoso-
phies and traditions of their people.
§ ATTRIBUTE: Choose one of the following attributes
and increase it by 1: Daring or Presence
§ DEPARTMENT: Choose one of Command, Security, or
Science; the character increases that department by 1.
§ VALUE: At this step, the character gains a single
value. This value should reflect the environment and
culture the character was raised within. Consider how
the character views their own culture, and how they
connect—or possibly, don’t connect—to the philos-
ophies and traditions of their people. Considering a
value associated with the species your character was
raised among can be fitting here.
§ ATTRIBUTE: Choose or randomly roll another spe-
cies from Step One, then choose one of the attributes
that species increases and increase your rating in
that attribute by 1.
§ DEPARTMENT: Increase one department rating by 1.
: . Busy Colony
The character comes from one of their culture’s oldest
or most prosperous colonies, which may be another
world within their home system—such as Luna or Mars
for Humans—or one of the first worlds colonized after
the culture achieved interstellar flight. These colonies
often develop a fiercely independent outlook, often
having developed with little direct aid from their home
world, and a sense of pride that accompanies being
among the first of their kind to tame another world.
: . Frontier Colony
The character comes from a colony located on the
fringes of known space, either on the edge of uncharted
space or on the border with another civilization. Frontier
colonists tend to be hardy and determined, even stub-
born, and well-prepared for the dangers that their home
may pose.
§ VALUE: At this step, the character gains a single
value. This value should reflect the environment and
culture the character was raised within. This is a good
opportunity to consider how the character views their
own culture, and how they connect—or possibly,
don’t connect—to the philosophies and traditions of
their people.
§ ATTRIBUTE: Choose one of the following attributes
and increase it by 1: Control or Fitness.
§ DEPARTMENT: Choose one of Conn, Security, or
Medicine; increase that department by 1.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
115
: . Homeworld
The character comes from the world that birthed their
civilization and has been surrounded by cultural and
spiritual legacies their entire life. Species homeworlds
are often utopian and idyllic, serving as the platonic ideal
of that species’ culture, or the recipients of an empire’s
wealth and prosperity. They also exemplify aspects of a
culture’s most revered traditions and serve as the heart
of that civilization’s legal and political landscape.
§ VALUE: At this step, the character gains a single
value. This value should reflect the environment and
culture the character was raised within. This is a good
opportunity to consider how the character views their
own culture, and how they connect—or possibly,
don’t connect—to the philosophies and traditions of
their people. The sidebars on each species’ values
can serve as inspiration here.
§ ATTRIBUTE: Choose one of the three attributes the
character’s species improved; increase one of those
attributes by 1.
 Culture,
or Mono-culture?
The alien species seen in Star Trek are often presented
as having a singular culture that spans their entire civi-
lization, while we still see elements of different cultures
among the Human characters that we see on-screen.
There’s no real need for this to be true except for story-
telling convenience; there’s room for a variety of cultures
and subcultures among the Vulcans, or the Andorians,
even if these differences might not be immediately
recognizable to those not intensely familiar with those
peoples. There’ll always be a degree of cultural blending
within these species anyway—all of them are repre-
sented by unified planetary governments, and celebrate
individual diversity, so many of the old divisions between
cultures are things of the past.
The same can be said of ethnicity and concepts of race.
Variation in physiognomy, skin color, and so forth can be
found among all species, typically because of evolutionary
adaptations to specific climates on a species’ homeworld.
Bajorans, Betazoids, Denobulans, Klingons, Romulans,
Tellarites, Trill, and Vulcans all have similar diversity in skin
color, hair types, and other such variations as Humans
do, and for essentially the same reasons. Andorians,
Aenar, Cardassians, and Orions have their own range of
variations in the color of their skin, hair, eyes, and so forth.
116
CHAPTER 4
§ DEPARTMENT: Choose one of Command,
Security, or Science; the character increases that
department by 1.
: . Isolated Colony
The character comes from a colony that is isolated from
broader galactic society. Worlds like the Vulcan mon-
astery on P’Jem use the vast distances between star
systems as an opportunity for contemplative isolation,
while others are settled because they present unique
research opportunities. The cultures of these colonies
tend to focus on learning and introspection.
§ VALUE: At this step, the character gains a single
value. This value should reflect the environment and
culture the character was raised within. This is a good
opportunity to consider how the character views their
own culture, and how they connect—or possibly,
don’t connect—to the philosophies and traditions of
their people.
§ ATTRIBUTE: Choose one of the following attributes
and increase it by 1: Reason or Insight.
§ DEPARTMENT: Choose one of Engineering, Science,
or Medicine; increase that department by 1.
: . Starship or Starbase
The character grew up in space, travelling aboard a star-
ship or living aboard a space station or starbase. While
they’re unlikely to have lived aboard a military or Starfleet
vessel—only some of them carry families—many freight-
ers, transports, and other civilian vessels have a tradition
of family or generational crews, and many officers with
families take postings to starbases rather than ships.
Those raised in space learn the ins-and-outs of shipboard
life as children, and many are groomed for leadership, or
learn to fly a shuttle in their formative years.
§ VALUE: At this step, the character gains a single
value. This value should reflect the environment and
culture the character was raised within. This is a good
opportunity to consider how the character views their
own culture, and how they connect—or possibly,
don’t connect—to the philosophies and traditions of
their people.
§ ATTRIBUTE: Choose one of the following attributes
and increase it by 1: Control or Insight
§ DEPARTMENT: Choose one of Command, Conn, or
Engineering; the character increases that depart-
ment by 1.
TOBIAS RICHTER
STEP THREE: UPBRINGING
THE NATURE OF A PERSON’S FAMILY AND THEIR SUR-
roundings as they grew up can have a massive impact
upon them, and whether they accept this influence, or
rebel against it, will shape the rest of their lives.
A player may choose their character’s Upbringing, or
randomly determine it from the Random Upbringing
table below by rolling a d20.
A character’s Upbringing provides them with three points
spread across two attributes. Which attributes can be
increased, and by how much, is determined not only by
the Upbringing chosen, but also by whether the character
accepted their Upbringing or rebelled against it.
Each Upbringing also gives the character a single point
to add to one of their departments, with each Upbringing
having a choice of which departments can be increased.
Finally, the character receives a single focus, which
should relate in some way to the Upbringing chosen (a
few examples are provided in each case). Finally, each
Upbringing gives the character a single talent.
: . Random Upbringing
D20 UPBRINGING
1–3 Agriculture or Rural
4–6 Artistic and Creative
7–9 Business or Trade
10–12 Diplomacy and Politics
13–15 Science and Technology
16–18 Starfleet or Military
19–20 Roll Again or Choose
When selecting talents, you may choose that talent
immediately or you may wait until the end of character
creation to make your choice.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
117
: . Agriculture or Rural
The character grew up surrounded more by nature than
by people, in rural communities, on the frontier, or some-
where else distanced from the bustle of cities. They
might be heavily involved in agriculture, growing real
food to supplement synthesized or replicated meals.
ATTRIBUTES
If the character accepted this Upbringing, the tough,
practical life on the land breeds a strong work ethic and
a healthy body, increasing their Control by 1 and their
Fitness by 2.
If the character rebelled against this Upbringing, they
are likely to have embraced science, technology, and the
fruits of civilization, increasing their Presence by 1 and
their Reason by 2.
DEPARTMENTS, FOCUS, AND TALENT
The character’s living off the land and growing up on the
edge of civilization allows them to increase one of Conn,
Security, or Medicine
The character’s focus should relate to the character’s
rural lifestyle, and the skills they learned there. Examples
include: Animal Handling, Athletics, Emergency
Medicine, Endurance, Ground Vehicles, Infectious
Diseases, Navigation, Toxicology, Survival Training.
The character also gains a single talent.
: . Artistic and Creative
The character’s life was filled with arts and creativity of all
kinds, and no matter what pursuits the character favors,
they are exposed to the great works of many cultures, and
given every opportunity to express themselves.
ATTRIBUTES
If the character accepted this Upbringing, they develop
a greater understanding of emotion and communication,
increasing their Insight by 1 and their Presence by 2.
If the character rebelled against this Upbringing, the
character is more inclined to action than to expression,
increasing their Daring by 1 and their Fitness by 2.
DEPARTMENTS, FOCUS, AND TALENT
The character’s ease with creativity and self-expression
lend themselves to many pursuits, allowing the character
to increase one of Command, Engineering, or Science.
118
CHAPTER 4
The character’s focus should relate to the character’s
preferred way of applying their skills. Examples include:
Botany, Cultural Studies, Holoprogramming, Linguistics,
Music, Observation, Persuasion, Psychology.
The character also gains a single talent.
: . Business or Trade
The character’s family may have connections on
countless worlds, overseeing and directing some grand
business endeavor. They might have been traders or in-
volved in interplanetary freight. Either way, the character
has grown up encountering people from all walks of life,
including those from outside their civilization, and their
outlook on life has been shaped accordingly.
ATTRIBUTES
If the character accepted this Upbringing, a cosmopol-
itan, ambitious lifestyle increases their Daring by 1 and
their Presence by 2.
If the character rebelled against this Upbringing, step-
ping away from the family business to find their own iden-
tity increases their Insight by 2 and their Reason by 1.
DEPARTMENTS, FOCUS, AND TALENT
The character’s experiences with their family busi-
ness allows them to increase any one of Command,
Engineering, or Science.
The character’s focus should relate to the nature of their
family’s business, covering skills that are valuable during
trade, or which were useful to the family business in other
ways. Examples include: Finances, Geology, Linguistics,
Manufacturing, Metallurgy, Negotiation, Survey.
The character also gains a single talent.
: . Diplomacy and
Politics
The character has been exposed to the complexities of
political thought and the nuances of diplomacy since
they were young, perhaps because a family member was
involved in those fields.
ATTRIBUTES
If the character accepted this Upbringing, they’re disci-
plined and well-versed in the arts of debate, increasing
their Control by 1 and their Presence by 2.
If the character rebelled against this Upbringing, then
they’ve instead sought more tangible things to focus on,
increasing their Fitness by 1 and their Reason by 2.
DEPARTMENTS, FOCUS, AND TALENT
The character’s familiarity with the practices and perils
of diplomacy, politics, and the law allow them to increase
any one of Command, Conn, or Security by 1.
The character’s focus should relate to the charac-
ter’s preferred way of applying their skills. Examples
include: Composure, Debate, Diplomacy, Espionage,
Interrogation, Law, Philosophy, Starfleet Protocol.
The character also gains a single talent.
: . Science and
Technology
The character’s home was one filled with the potential of
science, and cutting-edge developments were familiar
ground. Perhaps the character was raised by scientists,
engineers, or had mentors and teachers who encour-
aged a talent for the technical.
ATTRIBUTES
If the character accepted this Upbringing, they are ra-
tional, methodical, and precise, increasing their Control
by 2 and their Reason by 1.
If the character rebelled against this Upbringing, they
don’t lack technical talent, but they haven’t developed
that talent and instead rely more on instinct, increasing
their Daring by 1 and their Insight by 2.
DEPARTMENTS, FOCUS, AND TALENT
The character’s familiarity with cutting-edge science
and the latest research allows them to increase one of
Conn, Engineering, Science, or Medicine by 1.
The character’s focus should relate to the character’s
favored fields of study and inquiry. Examples include:
Astrophysics, Astronavigation, Computers, Cybernetics,
Power Systems, Genetics, Physics, Subspace
Communications, Surgery, Quantum Mechanics, Warp
Field Dynamics, Xenobiology.
The character also gains a single talent.
: . Starfleet or Military
The character’s family may have a strong tradition of naval
service, with at least one member of the family in every
generation serving their people in this way. Perhaps both
the character’s parents served in the military, who met in
service. Either way, the character’s formative years were
influenced by a military life. In the Federation, this will
normally refer to Starfleet, but it may just as easily apply
to groups like the Bajoran Militia, the Andorian Imperial
Guard, the Klingon Defense Fleet, Imperial Romulan Navy,
or any of a number of other military forces.
ATTRIBUTES
If the character accepted this Upbringing, the orderly,
purposeful life increases their Control by 2 and their
Fitness by 1.
If the character rebelled against this Upbringing, their
bold and self-determined living increases their Daring by
2 and their Insight by 1.
DEPARTMENTS, FOCUS, AND TALENT
The character’s exposure to the ways and traditions of
Starfleet allows them to increase any one department
rating by 1.
The character’s focus should relate to their connection
to Starfleet, covering skills learned during the charac-
ter’s formative years. Examples include: Astronavigation,
Composure, Extra-Vehicular Activity, Hand-to-Hand
Combat (may be renamed to a specific martial art),
Hand Phasers, Small Craft, Starfleet Protocol, Starship
Recognition, or History.
The character also gains a single talent.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
119
STEP FOUR: CAREER PATH
YOUR CHARACTER’S CAREER PATH IS THE CHOICE
that has the greatest impact upon them and shapes
them most significantly. This step is a matter of choosing
a character’s higher education and the profession they
enter; a character may have had several jobs, but the
choice made here will determine what the character’s
current and most significant profession is.
Each Career Path choice provides the following benefits:
: . Random Career Path
D20 CAREER PATH
1–4 Starfleet (Officer)
5–8 Starfleet (Enlisted)
9–10 Starfleet (Intelligence)
11–12 Diplomatic Corps
13–14 Civilian (Physician)
15–16 Civilian (Scientist)
17–18 Civilian (Official)
19–20 Civilian (Trader)
§ TRAIT: The character gains a single trait, reflecting
their professional status.
§ VALUE: The character gains a single value.
§ ATTRIBUTES: The character gains three points,
which may be split between two or three attributes
(increase three attributes by 1 each, or increase one
by 2 and another by 1). The character may pick these
attributes freely.
§ DEPARTMENTS: The character increases one of their
departments by 2, and then two others by 1 each.
These will be determined by the profession chosen.
§ FOCUSES: The character selects three focuses, at
least one of which should relate to the character’s
chosen profession. Each Career Path will list several
examples.
§ TALENT: The character gains a single talent.
You may choose your character’s Career Path, or
randomly determine it from the Random Career Path
table by rolling a d20. For non-Federation characters,
Starfleet options can reflect joining Starfleet as an
outsider, as was the case with examples like Saru,
Worf, or Nog, or it can be used to represent studying to
become an officer within their own civilization’s military
or paramilitary, such as the Klingon Defense Force, the
Bajoran Militia, or the Vulcan Exploratory Fleet. Adjust
details like traits accordingly.
: . Random Starfleet Division
D20 TRACK
1–6 Command
7–12 Operations
13–18 Sciences
19–20 Roll Again or Choose
A graduate of the Academy receives a commission as
an officer of Starfleet, holding the rank of ensign, after
which they are assigned to their first posting. Some
cadets—particularly those pursuing a higher education,
such as a doctorate—extend their time at the Academy
by a year or two, and graduate at the rank of Lieutenant
(junior grade).
The Academy provides different training depend-
ing upon a cadet’s aptitudes and desired role within
Starfleet, referred to as track. When you select this
option, choose (or roll on the Random Starfleet Division
table) which Academy track the character pursues:
Command, Operations, or Sciences.
: . Starfleet (Officer)
You are a Starfleet officer, and a graduate of Starfleet
Academy. After passing grueling entrance exams, you
spent four years at the Academy, dividing your time
between academic study, physical training, and gaining
practical experience. Much of your time was spent at
the main campus in San Francisco on Earth, but you
probably also spent time at other facilities across the
Federation, as well as aboard starships and starbases.
120
CHAPTER 4
COMMAND TRACK
The Command track is for those cadets who aspire to
command their own starship someday. It focuses on lead-
ership and interpersonal skills, diplomacy, decision-mak-
ing in crisis situations, an understanding of protocol and
procedure, and starship operations, which includes flight
control. Many Command track cadets begin their careers
as flight control officers and pilots, where their training
can be put to the test on a smaller scale while they gain
the experience necessary for more authority and respon-
sibility. Command track cadets customarily undertake the
infamous Kobayashi Maru test during their final year.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: James T. Kirk (Star Trek),
Kathryn Janeway (Voyager)
§ TRAIT: The character gains the trait Starfleet Officer.
§ VALUE: The character gains a single value, which
should reflect some aspect of the character’s beliefs
that developed during their time at the Academy.
Examples include:
§ Starfleet is a promise: I’d give my life for you, you’d
give your life for me, and nobody gets left behind.
§ The first duty of every Starfleet officer is to the truth.
MICHELE FRIGO
§ The Prime Directive is there to remind us that we
are not gods, and should not act like them.
§ ATTRIBUTES: The character gains three points,
which may be split between two or three attributes
(increase three attributes by 1 each, or increase one
by 2 and another by 1). The character may pick these
attributes freely.
§ DEPARTMENTS: The player must select either
Command or Conn as the character’s major—the
subject they studied most intensely. This department
is increased by 2. Then, the player selects two other
departments—the character’s minor subjects—which
are increased by 1 each. A character may not have
any department higher than 4 at this stage.
§ FOCUSES: The character selects three focuses, at
least one of which should relate to the character’s
chosen track. Examples include:
§ Astronavigation, Composure, Diplomacy, Extra-
Vehicular Activity, Evasive Action, Helm Operations,
Inspiration, Persuasion, Small Craft, Starship
Recognition, Starfleet Protocols, Team Dynamics
§ TALENT: The character gains a single talent.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
121
OPERATIONS TRACK
The Operations track is practical and hands-on, dealing
with many of the realities of Starfleet’s mission. Divided
broadly into Engineering and Security divisions,
Operations track cadets are defined by a sense of
pragmatism, whether that applies to the technical or
the tactical.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Samanthan Rutherford
(Lower Decks), Liam Shaw (Picard)
§ TRAIT: The character gains the trait Starfleet Officer.
§ VALUE: The character gains a single value, which
should reflect some aspect of the character’s beliefs
that developed during their time at the Academy.
Examples include:
§ Get it done right the first time
§ Sometimes, you just have to improvise
§ By the book isn’t worth much in practice
§ ATTRIBUTES: The character gains three points,
which may be split between two or three attributes
(increase three attributes by 1 each, or increase one
by 2 and another by 1). The character may pick these
attributes freely.
§ DEPARTMENTS: The player must select either
Engineering or Security as the character’s ma-
jor—the subject they studied most intensely. This
department is increased by 2. Then, the player
selects two other departments—the character’s
minor subjects—which are increased by 1 each. A
character may not have any department higher than
4 at this stage.
§ FOCUSES: The character selects three focuses, at
least one of which should relate to the character’s
chosen track. Examples include:
§ Computers, Cybernetics, Electro-Plasma Power
Systems, Espionage, Hand Phasers, Hand-to-Hand
Combat, Infiltration, Interrogation, Shipboard
Tactical Systems, Survival, Transporters &
Replicators, Warp Field Dynamics
§ TALENT: The character gains a single talent.
122
CHAPTER 4
SCIENCES TRACK
Somewhat isolated from the other tracks, the Sciences
track is primarily academic, with Starfleet Academy
producing many accomplished scientists. Included
within the Sciences track, but separated by a distinct
curriculum, is Starfleet Medical, training doctors, nurses,
and counselors to serve aboard Starfleet vessels and
facilities across the Federation.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Spock (Star Trek),
Saru (Discovery)
§ TRAIT: The character gains the trait Starfleet Officer.
The character may also gain a trait reflecting their
specific profession and the accompanying advanced
training, such as Physician, or Psychiatrist.
§ VALUE: The character gains a single value, which
should reflect some aspect of the character’s beliefs
that developed during their time at the Academy.
Examples include:
§ No conclusions until I’ve run some tests
§ I want to see what nobody else has seen
§ First, do no harm
§ ATTRIBUTES: The character gains three points,
which may be split between two or three attributes
(increase three attributes by 1 each, or increase one
by 2 and another by 1). The character may pick these
attributes freely.
§ DEPARTMENTS: The player must select either
Science or Medicine as the character’s major—the
subject they studied most intensely. This department
is increased by 2. Then, the player selects two other
departments—the character’s minor subjects—which
are increased by 1 each. A character may not have
any department higher than 4 at this stage.
§ FOCUSES: The character selects three focuses, at
least one of which should relate to the character’s
chosen track. Examples include:
§ Anthropology, Astrophysics, Botany, Computers,
Cybernetics, Emergency Medicine, Exo-tectonics,
Genetics, Geology, Infectious Diseases,
Linguistics, Physics, Psychiatry, Quantum
Mechanics, Trauma Surgery, Virology, Warp Field
Dynamics, Xenobiology
§ TALENT: The character gains a single talent.
: . Starfleet (Enlisted)
While Starfleet is best known for its highly competent
officers, they are not the only personnel in Starfleet.
Each year, a great many people enlist in Starfleet
rather than joining the Academy. This is often the case
for those who do not meet the requirements for the
Academy, or who only wish to serve for a few years to
gain some life experience.
Enlisted crew receive basic training in starship proce-
dures and protocols, as well as any specific courses
required for their position, at the Starfleet Technical
Services Academy on Mars, before being posted to a
starship, starbase, or other facility.
The demand for these enlisted crew varies over time,
with major recruitment drives occurring during times
when Starfleet is expanding, or needs to replenish
losses from disasters or times of conflict. Still, it’s a rare
ship that has no enlisted personnel, typically within the
Operations department, and experienced non-commis-
sioned officers (NCOs) are highly prized for their practi-
cal knowledge and hard-won experience. A few NCOs
obtain a commission later in their careers, becoming
full officers.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Janice Rand (Star Trek),
Miles O'Brien (Deep Space Nine)
§ TRAIT: The character gains the trait Starfleet Crew.
§ VALUE: The character gains a single value, which
should reflect some aspect of the character’s beliefs
that developed during their early years in Starfleet.
Examples include:
§ The satisfaction of a job well-done is worth the effort
§ Nowhere else can I get this experience
§ Don’t call me sir; I work for a living
§ ATTRIBUTES: The character gains three points,
which may be split between two or three attributes
(increase three attributes by 1 each, or increase one
by 2 and another by 1). The character may pick these
attributes freely.
§ DEPARTMENTS: The player must select one of Conn,
Security, Engineering, or Science, and increase it
by 2. Then, choose any two other departments, and
increase them by 1 each. A character may not have
any department higher than 4 at this stage.
 Commission Without
The Academy
Characters with a Starfleet (or equivalent military)
career hold a rank within that service, while diplomats
and civilian characters don’t, at least under normal
circumstances.
However, in practice, this isn’t always the case—on
numerous cases, it can be valuable for a civilian expert to
hold a rank, to give them a place in the chain of com-
mand, or it may be because they have chosen to join
up in adulthood, after establishing themselves in their
careers and their fields. Leonard McCoy, Chief Medical
Officer of the U.S.S. Enterprise was an example of this,
having been a civilian doctor before joining Starfleet, but
holding a rank of lieutenant commander during that time.
With discussion with the gamemaster, it is possible
to grant a civilian character a rank. In such cases, the
character can be promoted and demoted as with any
Starfleet/Military character.
§ FOCUSES: The character selects three focuses,
at least one of which should relate to whichever
department was increased by +2.
§ Examples include: Computers, Electro-Plasma
Power Systems, Emergency Medicine, EVA, Hand
Phasers, Hand-to-hand Combat, Helm Operations,
Shipboard Tactical Systems, Small Craft, Survival,
Transporters and Replicators
§ TALENT: The character gains a single talent.
: . Starfleet (Intelligence)
Starfleet maintains an intelligence division which moni-
tors and analyzes the activities of its neighbors, assess-
ing threats, identifying future problems or challenges,
and carrying out covert operations. A lot of this work
is passive, carried out as a natural part of Starfleet’s
operations, by analysts and computer algorithms sifting
through mission logs, sensor records, and similar data,
but it cannot be done exclusively in this way.
Starfleet Intelligence recruits operatives and assets
across the Federation, and sometimes even beyond.
Most established operatives are handlers and analysts,
gathering information from a variety of sources and
REPORTING FOR DUTy
123
establishing their own networks of informants, who
live ordinary lives and only occasionally pass on infor-
mation. When Starfleet Intelligence needs to perform
more significant actions, it often selects personnel from
elsewhere in Starfleet to carry out the work.
Many starbases and a few starships have an Intelligence
officer on board, who serve as a point of contact for
their commanding officers and spend much of their time
gathering and summarizing information that may be of
use to ongoing missions.
Other civilizations in the Galaxy have comparable intel-
ligence agencies, such as the Romulan Tal Shiar or the
Cardassian Obsidian Order, both of which are infamous ex-
amples feared both within and beyond those civilizations.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Raffaela Musiker (Picard),
Ro Laren (The Next Generation)
§ TRAIT: The character gains the trait Intelligence
Operative.
§ VALUE: The character gains a single value, which
should reflect some aspect of the character’s beliefs
that developed during their early years in Starfleet
Intelligence. Examples include:
§ Trust, but verify
§ Insufficient information can result in disaster
§ Secrets are my business
§ ATTRIBUTES: The character gains three points,
which may be split between two or three attributes
(increase three attributes by 1 each, or increase one
by 2 and another by 1). The character may pick these
attributes freely.
§ DEPARTMENTS: The player must select one of
Command or Security and increase it by 2. Then,
choose any two other departments, and increase
them by 1 each. A character may not have any depart-
ment higher than 4 at this stage.
§ FOCUSES: The character selects three focuses, at
least one of which should relate to whichever depart-
ment was increased by 2. Examples include:
§ Computers, Diplomacy, Espionage, Hand Phasers,
Hand-to-hand Combat, Infiltration, Interrogation,
Linguistics, Persuasion, Politics
§ TALENT: The character gains a single talent.
: . Diplomatic Corps
Whether you’ve spent a lifetime in politics and diplo-
macy, or you became an honorary diplomat after an
illustrious career, you are now part of the network of
ambassadors and envoys who connect distant worlds
and interstellar nations.
When entering diplomatic service, you may speak on
behalf of a single world, or on behalf of an interplane-
tary entity such as the Federation. The most respect-
ed diplomats may be roving ambassadors-at-large,
leveraging their reputation and experience to arrange
summits and treaties and speak on major international
matters, constantly moving from place to place as the
situation demands.
Starfleet, and the militaries of other civilizations, com-
monly provide protection and support for diplomatic
missions, and thus ambassadors can often be found on
Starfleet vessels and similar.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Sarek (Star Trek),
Curzon Dax (Deep Space Nine)
§ TRAIT: The character gains the trait Diplomat or
Ambassador. You may adjust this to reflect the
specifics of your diplomatic posting, noting who you
represent, where you’re posted, or both: for exam-
ple, Federation Ambassador-at-large, or Klingon
Ambassador to Vulcan.
§ VALUE: The character gains a single value, which
should reflect some aspect of the character’s beliefs
that developed during their time in diplomatic service.
Examples include:
§ Eventually, everyone comes back to the table
to talk
§ The right words can shape countless lives
§ You don’t get a better world if you don’t work for it
§ ATTRIBUTES: The character gains three points,
which may be split between two or three attributes
(increase three attributes by 1 each, or increase one
by 2 and another by 1). The character may pick these
attributes freely.
§ DEPARTMENTS: The player increases Command
by 2. Then, choose any two other departments, and
increase them by 1 each. A character may not have
any department higher than 4 at this stage.
124
CHAPTER 4
§ FOCUSES: The character selects three focuses, at
least one of which should relate to whichever depart-
ment was increased by 2. Examples include:
§ Anthropology, Composure, Diplomacy, Espionage,
History, Linguistics, Literature, Persuasion,
Philosophy, Politics
§ TALENT: The character gains a single talent.
: . Civilian (Physician)
You’ve devoted your life to healing others. You may be
trained as a doctor, a paramedic, a counselor, or you
may be a medical researcher rather than a practicing
physician, but either way, the goal is to help people who
are hurt in some way. Your skills are in demand across
explored space, and even civilian-trained physicians can
find themselves aboard Starfleet and military ships.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Phlox (Enterprise)
§ TRAIT: The character gains the trait Physician. This
can be adjusted to reflect a particular specialty, such
as Surgeon or Geneticist.
§ VALUE: You gain a single value, which should reflect
the character’s beliefs developed during their studies,
or which led them to enter medicine in the first place.
Examples include:
§ The Hippocratic Oath
§ I must respect my patient’s wishes
§ An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure
§ ATTRIBUTES: You gain three points, which may be di-
vided among two or three attributes freely (either one
gets 2 and the other gets 1, or all three get 1). These
may be assigned freely.
§ DEPARTMENTS: You increase your Medicine by 2,
and two other departments by 1. In addition, you may
reduce one of your other departments by 1 and add
that point to any department not already increased.
§ FOCUSES: You select three focuses. Examples
include:
§ Emergency Medicine, Surgery, Psychiatry, Virology,
Cybernetics, Genetics, Xenobiology
§ TALENT: The character gains a single talent.
: . Civilian (Scientist)
You pursue scientific truth or technological progress,
seeking to become your generation’s Zephram Cochrane
or Richard Daystrom. You probably specialize in a single
field of scientific study or technical expertise, or a small
number of related fields. You may end up working with
Starfleet or a military, but this is more because they are
interested in your work.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Leah Brahms
(The Next Generation), Ruon Tarka (Discovery)
§ TRAIT: The character gains the trait Scientist or
Engineer. Adjust this to reflect the specifics of the
character’s profession, such as Cyberneticist or
Transporter Expert.
§ VALUE: You gain a single value, which should reflect
the character’s beliefs developed during their studies,
or which led them to pursue science or engineering
in the first place. Examples include:
§ I have devoted my career to this research
§ Science allows us to seek truth and understanding
§ With the right tools, we can solve any problem
§ ATTRIBUTES: You gain three points, which may be di-
vided among two or three attributes freely (either one
gets 2 and the other gets 1, or all three get 1). At least
one of the attributes you increase must be Reason, as
nobody gets far in science or engineering without a
keen intellect.
§ DEPARTMENTS: You increase your Science of
Engineering by 2, and two other departments by 1. In
addition, you may reduce one of your other depart-
ments by 1 and add that point to any department not
already increased.
§ FOCUSES: You select three focuses. Examples
include:
§ Astrophysics, Botany, Cybernetics, Exo-Tectonics,
Genetics, Quantum Mechanics, Subspace
Mechanics, Temporal Mechanics, Transporters
and Replicators, Warp Field Dynamics
§ TALENT: The character gains a single talent.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
125
: . Civilian (Official)
You are a civil servant, operating within the structure
of a civilization to ensure that if continues to function
smoothly and to the benefit of its people. Your role may
be narrowly focused upon a specific area of government,
or you may be responsible for overseeing large depart-
ments or ministries, your decisions impacting millions or
even billions of lives. Either way, your role is important,
and you take pride in the necessary work you carry out.
Such officials may have duties that require travel aboard
a starship, or being stationed on a starbase. Starbases
often have a large civilian population, necessitating a
civilian administration parallel with a Starfleet or military
command.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Nathan Samuels
(Enterprise), Shakaar Edon (Deep Space Nine)
§ TRAIT: The character gains a trait which reflects
their title or role, such as Administrator. This should
be adjusted to fit the specific title the character
possesses.
§ VALUE: You gain a single value, which should reflect
the character’s beliefs developed during their studies,
or which led them to enter public service in the first
place. Examples include:
§ Keeping the wheels of civilization turning is vital
§ My decisions can affect a great many people; I
must choose carefully
§ The law should serve the needs of the people
§ ATTRIBUTES: You gain three points, which may be di-
vided among two or three attributes freely (either one
gets 2 and the other gets 1, or all three get 1). At least
one of the attributes you increase must be Insight or
Presence, as good instincts and a strong personality
are valuable for getting into office.
§ DEPARTMENTS: You increase your Command by 2,
and two other departments by 1. In addition, you may
reduce one of your other departments by 1 and add
that point to any department not already increased.
§ FOCUSES: You select three focuses. Examples include:
§ Bureaucracy, Diplomacy, Politics, Linguistics,
History, Philosophy, or something related to your
role in public service
§ TALENT: The character gains a single talent.
: . Civilian (Trader)
You exchange money for goods or services. Within the
Federation, the actual transactions are a trivial mat-
ter, but other civilizations still make more overt use of
money, with gold-pressed latinum serving as a common
economic standard, easily exchanged for the Cardassian
lek, Bajoran lita, or Klingon darsek. You’re a part of that
galactic economy, providing a service or trading in valua-
ble goods (or both) in exchange for latinum, currency, or
other goods or services in turn.
Starbases and space stations are a good place to find
civilian traders, as they’re hubs of activity that see lots of
traffic. Starships—particularly exploratory vessels—may
take a trader aboard as a guide or local expert when
venturing through unfamiliar regions of space.
EXAMPLE CHARACTERS: Quark (Deep Space Nine),
Cleveland "Book" Booker (Discovery)
§ TRAIT: The character gains the trait Merchant. This
can be adjusted further to reflect the character’s spe-
cific profession, such as Bartender or Free Trader.
§ VALUE: You gain a single value, which should reflect
the character’s beliefs developed during their career,
or which led them to become a merchant in the first
place. Examples include:
§ Today’s strangers are tomorrow’s customers
§ When all your needs are met, it’s the experience
that matters
§ You wouldn’t begrudge me a little profit in this
venture?
§ ATTRIBUTES: You gain three points, which may be
divided among two or three attributes freely (either
one gets 2 and the other gets 1, or all three get 1).
At least one of the attributes you increase must be
Insight or Presence, as a successful trader is often a
“people person.”
§ DEPARTMENTS: You increase your Command by 2,
and two other departments by 1. In addition, you may
reduce one of your other departments by 1 and add
that point to any department not already increased.
§ FOCUSES: You select three focuses. Examples include:
§ Art, Cooking, Psychology, Economics, Logistics,
Persuasion, Tailoring, Disruptors
§ TALENT: The character gains a single talent.
126
CHAPTER 4
STEP FIVE: EXPERIENCE
AT THIS STAGE, THE PLAYER MUST DECIDE IF THEIR
character is a novice officer, an experienced officer, or a
veteran with decades of experience?
 Age
This stage grants the character a value and a talent. This
stage should always be chosen rather than rolled—if
you’re creating your character randomly, default to the
Veteran option.
With the Federation’s medical science, people can
live long, healthy, productive lives. The average life
expectancy of a Human being is around 120 years,
while some more robust species—such as Vulcans and
Denobulans—can live far longer than that. With that
increased lifespan and better health comes many years
of vitality, allowing people to fulfil their ambitions and
better themselves for many decades.
: . Novice
You’re defined by your potential more than your expe-
rience. Your raw talent and expectations of what the
universe is like have not yet been tempered by reality.
§ VALUE: The character receives a value, which must
reflect the character’s inexperience and naïveté in
some way. Examples include:
§ I can’t wait to see what’s out there
§ The Galaxy isn’t what I expected
§ I must prove myself
A character can be of any age in Star Trek Adventures,
though this should be guided by the choice made in Step
Five: Experience. A Novice is likely to be in their early
20s: old enough to have completed Starfleet Academy,
but not old enough to have done much else. Most
Experienced Officers working up the ranks are in their
late 20s, or their 30s or 40s. A Veteran Officer should be
in their 50s or 60s, or even older, remembering that peo-
ple stay fit and healthy for a long time in the Federation.
These numbers can be adjusted for species that live a
particularly long time: a middle-aged Vulcan may be a
century old, and as fit as a Human half their age.
§ TALENT: The character receives a single talent:
Untapped Potential, described below.
UNTAPPED POTENTIAL
REQUIREMENT: Novice (only available during character
creation)
Select one of your attributes when you receive this tal-
ent. You’re inexperienced, but talented and with a bright
future. You may not have or increase any attribute to
above 11, or any department to above 4 while you have
this talent (and may have to adjust attributes and depart-
ments accordingly at the end of character creation).
Whenever you succeed at a task for which you bought
one or more additional dice (by any means), roll a d20
after the roll. If you roll equal to or less than the chosen
attribute, gain 1 bonus Momentum; if you roll higher, add
1 Threat instead. While you possess this talent, you can-
not gain any higher rank than Lieutenant (junior grade),
or a higher enlisted rate than Petty Officer.
EVA LARA
REPORTING FOR DUTy
127
: . Experienced
You have many years of experience in your chosen field,
and you’re enjoying a promising career. This is the default
assumption for characters created using these rules.
§ VALUE: The character receives a value, which may be
chosen freely.
§ TALENT: The character receives a single talent,
which may be chosen freely.
: . Veteran
You have decades of experience in your chosen profes-
sion, and you’ve likely seen much of the Alpha and Beta
Quadrants, if not more of the Galaxy. Your judgement
and opinions are highly regarded by those around you,
even those who hold higher rank or status.
§ VALUE: The character receives a value, which must
reflect the character’s years of experience and
the beliefs they’ve formed over their long career.
Examples include:
§ There’s not much that can surprise me anymore
§ You don’t survive this long without facing loss
§ I’ve trusted my instincts long enough to doubt
them now
§ TALENT: The character receives a single talent:
Veteran, described below.
VETERAN
REQUIREMENT: Veteran (during character creation, or
at gamemaster’s discretion)
You’re wise and experienced, and draw upon inner
reserves of willpower and determination in a meas-
ured and considered way. Whenever you spend
Determination, roll a d20. If you roll equal to or less than
your Control rating, you immediately regain that point of
Determination. If you are Starfleet or military, you hold
a rank of at least lieutenant commander, or an enlisted
rate of at least chief petty officer.
STEP SIX: CAREER EVENTS
THE CHARACTER’S CAREER IS A TAPESTRY OF EXPE-
riences, but among this, a few were pivotal moments in
the character’s life. A character defines which moments
are important in retrospect, and what seemed definitive
to someone in their early life may be inconsequential
decades later.
This is handled as two identical steps—roll or choose
a Career Event, gain whatever benefits it provides, and
then repeat the process, giving the character two defini-
tive Career Events.
Each Career Event increases one attribute and
one department by one point each, and gives the
: . Random Career Event
D20 CAREER EVENT
1 Betrayed Ideals for a Superior
2 Breakthrough or Invention
3 Called Out a Superior
4 Conflict with a Hostile Culture
5 Dealt with a Plague
6 Death of a Friend
7 Discovered an Artifact
8 Encountered a Truly Alien Being
9 First Contact
10 Lauded by Another Culture
D20 CAREER EVENT
11 Learned Unique Language
12 Mentored
13 Negotiated a Treaty
14 New Battle Strategy
15 Required to Take Command
16 Serious Injury
17 Ship Destroyed
18 Solved an Engineering Crisis
19 Special Commendation
20 Transporter Accident
128
CHAPTER 4
character one additional focus. Which attribute and
which department are improved—and guidelines and
suggestions for focuses—is listed in the entries for each
Career Event.
Many Career Events also grant the character the option
of a trait, to reflect some major lasting impact on the
character’s life. These are not compulsory.
The player may wish to combine multiple Career Events
into a single event in the character’s backstory or have
them as distinct moments in their history. Players may
also choose to roll more than twice for Career Events; in
this case, the character can mix and match the benefits
each Career Event provides, so long as they do not gain
more than a total of two attribute increases, two depart-
ment increases, and two focuses for this step.
Younger characters may assume that one or both of
their Career Events occurred during their training—such
as cadets gaining field experience aboard a ship during
their third or fourth year.
: . Betrayed Ideals
for a Superior
The character was placed in a situation where they had
to choose between a trusted superior and their own
ideals, and they chose to follow the superior.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Presence
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Command
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Persuasion, Inspiration,
Investigation
: . Breakthrough or
Invention
The character made an important technological discov-
ery, devised a new way of using a particular technology,
or invented some new technology that will be invaluable
in the future.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Any
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Engineering
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Experimental Technology,
Invention, or Improvisation
§ TRAIT: The character may gain trait Inventor of X,
where X is the name of the technology invented.
: . Called Out a Superior
The character was placed in a situation where they had
to choose between a trusted superior and their own
ideals, and they chose to follow their ideals.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Reason
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Conn
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Uniform Code of Justice,
History, Starfleet Protocol
: . Conflict with a
Hostile Culture
The character was involved in a battle with a hostile force.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Fitness
§ DEPARTMENT: +1 Security
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Hand Phasers, Hand-to-
Hand Combat, Tactical Systems
: . Dealt with a Plague
The character’s ship was assigned to provide aid to a
world dealing with an epidemic.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Insight
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Medicine
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Infectious Diseases,
Emergency Medicine, Triage
: . Death of a Friend
One of the character’s friends was killed in action.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Insight
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Medicine
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Counseling, but it may also
represent a skill or pursuit the character takes up in
their fallen friend’s memory
: . Discovered an Artifact
The character discovered a device or fragment of tech-
nology from a now-extinct civilization.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Reason
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Engineering
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Ancient Technology,
Computers, Reverse Engineering
REPORTING FOR DUTy
129
: . Encountered a Truly
Alien Being
The character encountered a life-form which is truly
alien, something barely within the comprehension of
humanoid life. It might have been some godlike entity,
or a creature that swims through space, but whatever it
was, it was not life as we know it.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Reason
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Science
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Empathy, Philosophy,
Xenobiology
: . First Contact
The character was involved in one of the most important
of Starfleet’s missions: first contact with another culture.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Presence
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Any
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Cultural Studies, Diplomacy,
Infiltration
: . Lauded by Another
Culture
The character was involved in a mission that earned the
official praise of a non-Federation culture; they are now
considered to be a friend to those people.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Presence
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Science
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: A focus of X Culture, replac-
ing the X with the name of that culture or any that
represent skills or techniques specific to that culture.
§ TRAIT: A good example might be Friend to the X,
replacing the X with the name of the culture. This re-
flects the character’s renown among that culture, and
the benefits and problems such status brings.
130
: . Learned Unique
Language
The character encounters a species with an unusual form
of communication and learns to communicate with them.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Insight
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Science
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Linguistics, Cultural Studies,
Negotiations
CHAPTER 4
: . Mentored
A highly-respected officer took notice of the character’s
career. For a time, the character served as the officer’s
pilot and aide, gaining the benefit of the officer’s experi-
ences and lessons.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Any
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Conn
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Composure or Etiquette, any
focus reflecting the officer’s specialties
: . Negotiated a Treaty
The character was part of a delegation that helped
negotiate a treaty, agreement, or alliance with a culture
outside the Federation.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Control
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Command
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Diplomacy, Negotiation,
Galactic Politics
: . New Battle Strategy
In combat with a hostile force, the character devised a
new strategy or tactic.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Daring
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Security
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Combat Tactics or Hazard
Awareness
: . Required to Take
Command
During a mission, a crisis left the mission’s leader unable
to lead. This required the character to take command,
something they may not have been prepared for.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Daring
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Command
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Inspiration or Composure
RODRIGO GONZALEZ
TOLEDO
: . Serious Injury
The character was seriously hurt and needed to spend a
considerable amount of time recovering.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Fitness
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Medicine
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: The focus should reflect the
circumstances of the character’s injury, something
that helped them through recovery, or something they
took up after recovering.
§ TRAIT: The character may gain a trait, which should
reflect some lasting effect of the character’s injury
or the way they recovered. Examples: Prosthetic
Implant or some form of disability.
: . Ship Destroyed
The ship the character was serving on was destroyed
during a mission, and the character was one of the few
who survived.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Daring
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Security
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Extra Vehicular Operations,
Small Craft, Survival
: . Solved an
Engineering Crisis
The character was instrumental in ending a crisis
caused by malfunctioning technology and saved many
lives in the process.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Control
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Engineering
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Electro-Plasma Power
Systems, Fusion Reactors, Warp Engines
: . Special Commendation
During a crisis, the character saved the lives of several
colleagues, helping them to safety. This earned the char-
acter a special commendation.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Fitness
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Any
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Athletics, Survival,
Emergency Medicine
: . Transporter Accident
The character suffered some manner of strange acci-
dent while using a transporter.
§ ATTRIBUTE: +1 Control
§ DEPARTMENT: + 1 Conn
§ FOCUS SUGGESTIONS: Transporters & Replicators,
Small Craft, Quantum Mechanics
REPORTING FOR DUTy
131
STEP SEVEN: FINISHING TOUCHES
AT THIS STAGE, THE CHARACTER IS ALMOST COM-
plete, and needs a few final elements and adjustments.
This serves as a last chance to customize the character
before play and cannot not be completed randomly.
: . Value
The character receives one final value. This might
reflect the Career Events from Step Six, or it may
represent some other element of the character. It may
be a relationship, connecting the character to another
character in the crew, or to another organization or
culture in some way. If you have other values you hav-
en’t chosen from earlier steps, you should also choose
them here.
: . Attributes
A character may not have any attributes above 12,
and may not have more than one attribute at 12 (if the
character has the Untapped Potential talent, from Step
Five, they may not have any attributes above 11 instead).
For any attribute with a rating above those limits, reduce
it until it is within the limit. For each point reduced on
an attribute, increase another attribute by 1, though the
limits noted above must still be obeyed.
Once this has been completed, the character may then
increase two attributes by 1 each; again, the normal
limits apply.
: . Departments
A character may not have any department ratings above
5, and they may not have more than one department at 5
(if the character has the Untapped Potential talent, from
Step Five, they may not have any departments above 4
instead). For any department which has a rating above
and those limits, reduce it until it is within the limit. For
each point reduced on a department, increase another
department by 1, though the limits noted above must
still be obeyed.
Once this has been done, the character may then
increase two departments by 1 each; again, the normal
limits apply.
: . Focuses
A character should have six focuses, plus any additional
ones granted by species or talents, prior to this stage.
: . Talents
You should have chosen three talents by this stage. Any
talents which you’re permitted to take, but which you
haven’t selected yet, choose them now.
In addition, you may now select one extra talent, bring-
ing you to a total of four.
: . Final Details
Finally, there are a few other things that need to be
determined:
§ FINAL CHECK: The character’s attributes, added
together, should add up to 56. The character’s de-
partments added together should add up to 16. The
character should have a species ability, four values,
four talents, and six focuses.
§ PERSONAL DETAILS: Choose the character’s
name and age (discussed in the sidebar on page
127) and decide on a rough description of the
character’s personality and appearance, if this
hasn’t been done already.
§ PASTIME: You may select a pastime (see sidebar
opposite), which represents a hobby or passion the
character enjoys when not on duty. This should only
be useful occasionally, but it can be a fun roleplay-
ing prompt.
§ ROLE: This should be done with the rest of the group
and is described in more detail on page 135. Your
role grants you a Role Benefit. If the character is
Starfleet or military, you’ll also have your rank deter-
mined here.
§ EQUIPMENT: The character receives a communicator
and additional equipment described on page 141.
Once these final details have been resolved, the charac-
ter is complete!
: . Personal Details
This step is about turning the choices and numbers of
the lifepath into a person, whose story can be explored
as the game progresses.
NAME
Every character needs a name. This can be anything,
though it’s probably best to avoid anything that would
132
CHAPTER 4
 Pastimes
At the end of character creation, you may select a pas-
time which represents a hobby or passion, something
reflecting what the character enjoys doing in their
spare time, or which the character is interested in but
which isn’t really related to their day-to-day activities or
their duties.
These pastimes are unlikely to be used during ordinary
gameplay—it’s rare for an adventure to hinge upon a
character being an expert kadis-kot player, or a fan of
20th century Earth literature—but they can help flesh
out a character and their personality and give a sense of
what they do when off-duty.
If they do become relevant to a task being attempted,
the gamemaster is encouraged to reward this unusual
occurrence by letting the player use the pastime as
a focus, connected to whichever department seems
appropriate: the actual choice matters less than allowing
the character to use the pastime on something they’re
passionate about.
Characters may gain or change pastimes as the players
sees fit; even in the enlightened future displayed in Star
Trek, people pursue hobbies and then often let them go
in favor of other interests over time. There is almost no
limit to the variety of things which could be counted as
pastimes. Suggestions include:
§ Creative pastimes involve practicing or studying
some form of artistic expression. A character might
enjoy painting, sculpture, writing fiction, photography
or holography, or they may have a fondness for the
works of a specific era or culture (or both), such as
Vulcan poetry, Andorian expressionist painters, or
Cardassian enigma tales, and may collect examples
of those works to admire.
§ Crafts are like creative pastimes but tend to involve
making things which have a practical use. Even in an
age of replicators, characters often enjoy the practical
act of making something. Cooking is an example of
this, but carpentry, fashion design, holo-program-
ming, or similar are all options. Many an engineer
or pilot has grown up building model spaceships or
tinkering with computers and other machines.
§ Knowledge is often the simple joy of discovering
things and expanding one’s understanding of the
universe. Many characters may have a love of
learning and spend their spare time reading up on
history or a specific field of scientific inquiry. This
can often overlap with a character’s more job-re-
lated focuses, and something a character enjoyed
doing during their formative years may lead them
into a career pursuing these hobbies. Still, many
characters have an interest in learning about topics
unrelated to their duties.
§ Performance pastimes are similar to creative ones,
but often involve an audience as well. A character
may play a musical instrument such as a trombone,
clarinet, or Vulcan lute, or they might sing, practice
some form of dance, or they may be a fan of theater,
whether writing, directing, or acting. Similarly, a char-
acter might find enjoyment in specific genres of per-
formance art from various cultures and eras, such as
the plays of Shakespeare, Klingon opera, or Andorian
blues, and enjoy recordings of classic performances
rather than performing themselves.
§ Self-improvement covers a character’s desire to
better themselves and to test their own physical and
mental limits. This can cover things like meditation,
but also physical fitness, whether in general terms,
or in more specific activities such as swimming,
distance running, climbing, and skydiving. It can also
cover activities such as horseback riding, wilderness
survival, and camping.
§ Sports and games are common pastimes in many
cultures, and a character may spend much of their
spare time playing and mastering them. This can
include strategic board games, like chess (2D or
3D), kadis-kot, the Vulcan game kal-toh, or games
of chance and skill like poker, dabo, the Ferengi
game tongo, chula, or the Klingon game t’Sang. It
can also include physical sports such as baseball,
water polo, or ice hockey, all originating from Earth
though finding popularity elsewhere. This can also
include competitive martial arts, but characters who
practice a martial art as a sport are also likely to be
able to use it in a real fight (and would likely have it
as a focus).
REPORTING FOR DUTy
133
 Styles, Forms of
Address, and Pronouns
When coming up with the personal details of your
character, it’s often useful to spend a little time thinking
about how they are likely to be addressed by others.
At the most basic form, this might just entail choosing
the character’s pronouns; this might be an obvious
choice for some, with masculine characters going by
he/him, and feminine ones going by she/her, but some
people don’t feel as if they fit neatly into either of those
categories and may choose they/them or other pro-
nouns, especially as not all species conform to the same
gender norms. Andorians expectations and expressions
of sex and gender don’t necessarily match those of
Humans, for example, while joined Trill frequently have a
more fluid experience of both sex and gender than most
other species.
Forms of address are also often affected by a character’s
profession, especially if they’re a Starfleet or military
officer. This is likely to include titles like doctor, or the
character’s rank or rate.
Within Starfleet, it is a common tradition—adopted from
old Earth naval traditions—to address subordinate of-
ficers as “Mister,” and to refer to their superiors as “Sir.”
How closely these traditions are observed—if at all—
depends on the culture of the individual ship; different
captains have different preferences.
It is tradition to refer to the commanding officer of a ship
as "Captain", regardless of their actual rank. Similarly,
executive officers are often addressed as “Number One”
by their commanding officers. Additionally, ranks and
rates may be shortened in common use: lieutenant com-
mander is often shortened to commander, lieutenant
(junior grade) is often shortened to lieutenant, and chief
petty officers (and above) are often simply addressed
as chief. Any Starfleet or military officer who is also a
medical doctor will customarily be addressed as doctor
in place of their rank.
134
CHAPTER 4
break the mood of the game. A character’s name reflects
their culture—different species and cultures have differ-
ent conventions for how they give names, and many cul-
tures ascribe traditional meanings to names, or require
that a name take a certain form. For alien characters,
the name may fit their species—and some guidance for
that is provided here—while for Human characters, their
name should be reflective of their culture and upbring-
ing. In any case, it’s better to give a character an original
name, rather than adopt one from another source, as it’s
likely to be less distracting to the other players.
As cultures intermingle and influence one another,
approaches to naming evolve, and characters may have
several names for different purposes, or different ver-
sions of their name.
The species entries (beginning on page 100) provide
a rough overview of each species’ naming conventions,
sample names, as well as examples of complete names
where the species has unusual naming conventions.
PERSONALITY
Once the players have an idea of what their characters
are like, and have thought about what experiences and
career choices have shaped their life to date, con-
sider what sort of personality the character has. Are
they grumpy, by-the-book? Adventuresome? Wise?
Thoughtful? Tired of routine? Calm? Even choosing a
few adjectives like this can help lock down the person-
ality of a character. It doesn’t mean they’re always like
this—the crewmembers should be three-dimensional,
complex characters that make the game more exciting.
Characters can evolve and change over time, but it’s
good to have an idea of how the character will behave
from the start.
A character’s values are a good basis for a character’s
personality, and vice versa. If a player has had difficulty
devising any of their character’s values during character
creation, this is a good opportunity to consider them.
APPEARANCE
What does the character look like? A character’s species
will give you some idea of what features they will have,
but the finer points such as their build, height, or any
distinguishing features will give the players something
to picture when thinking of their characters. Are they
distinctive or average-looking? Do they have any habits,
or behavior quirks? It’s often useful to give characters
some sort of visual description.
Given Star Trek’s history on television and in movies, it
may even be useful for players to think of an actor or ac-
tress who they could imagine portraying that character.
This can help both with the character’s appearance, and
with other details like their voice and mannerisms, which
can all provide inspiration for a player.
RELATIONSHIPS
While a character’s values may define some of their
relationships, life aboard a starship on a continu-
ing mission of exploration places many people in a
confined space for long periods of time. Consider the
character’s family relationships: where are the rest
of their family? Do they have a spouse or partner (or
multiples) aboard the ship? Is the character in contact
with the rest of their family regularly, and how did they
respond to the character being assigned to a mission
in deep space?
CHARACTER ROLE
A CHARACTER’S PLACE WITHIN THE CREW OF THEIR
ship (or station, or planetary outpost, or wherever you’re
setting the game), represented as a character role, is an
important consideration, but it’s a choice that should be
left to the end of the character creation process if this
method is used.
Main characters are usually the most important people
on their ship or station—the group of personnel who
make important decisions, such as the senior staff of
a Starfleet vessel, who aid the captain as department
heads, subject matter experts, and trusted advisors.
Main characters may fill any of the following roles. Not
every post will have every role, and not every role must
be filled by a main character. The senior staff members
are chosen at the discretion of the commanding officer,
so if there are roles not represented in the group, they
 Different Styles
of Game
If the game being run is not focused on the senior staff
of a starship, then choosing certain roles may not make
sense. The gamemaster may choose to skip this part
entirely or devise alternative roles more suited to the
style of game being run.
What about the people around the character? How do
the main characters get on with one another? How does
the character regard the rest of the crew, and how are
they regarded by them? Is the character close friends
with anyone else on board, relaxing with them when
off-duty? Does the character have any enemies or rivals?
A character may have relationships to organizations,
institutions, or even cultures as well. How does the char-
acter regard Starfleet? How do they relate to their own
culture? Do they have positive or negative experiences
with a foreign culture or institution?
These details can make the interaction between the
characters more interesting and add more depth to the
character. Like a character’s personality, a character’s re-
lationships can—and should—evolve over time, and some
relationships may become so strong (whether friendly or
adversarial) that they can become values for the character.
may be filled by supporting characters, by NPCs, or left
vacant. Some roles are specific to certain departments,
which are noted with each entry.
Each role comes with a distinct benefit in-game—a role
benefit—as well as defining what the character’s job is.
: . Service Roles
The following roles are found within Starfleet in all eras
of play, unless otherwise noted. Non-Starfleet characters
in similar organizations (e.g., the Klingon Defense Force
or Romulan Imperial Navy) may select from this list of
roles as well, gaining the same benefit.
COMMANDING OFFICER
Even if the commanding officer does not hold the rank
of captain, they are usually referred to as captain by
their subordinates aboard a starship. Aboard stations,
commanding officers are referred to by their rank.
Commanding officers are responsible for the ship or
facility under their command as well as executing the
orders and directives from their leadership.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: You may spend Determination to
grant any other character you can communicate with
1 Determination; this does not have to be linked to
using or challenging a value.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
135
EXECUTIVE OFFICER
Second-in-command. The executive officer is the
captain’s chief advisor and takes command in situations
where the captain is unable to. If a ship does not have
a dedicated executive officer, an officer in another role
should be noted as second-in-command, but they will
not gain the benefits of this role.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: When an allied character in com-
munication with you spends Determination, you may
spend 3 Momentum (Immediate) to enable that char-
acter to regain the spent point of Determination.
OPERATIONS MANAGER
The operations manager manages and oversees all
technical operations aboard or involving the ship,
normally from the operations station on the bridge, or in
conjunction with the chief engineer (on smaller ships,
one officer may fill both roles). This often entails taking
on the duties of a science officer if there is no dedicated
science officer among the senior staff.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: Whenever you create a trait repre-
senting a piece of equipment, or an alteration made
to existing equipment, any character who benefits
from that trait while you are present in the scene may
re-roll a d20.
136
CHAPTER 4
CHIEF ENGINEER
The chief engineer is responsible for ensuring the ship
remains operational and functional, and commands the
engineering department aboard the ship.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: You reduce the opportunity cost of
engineering teams by 1, to a minimum of 0. Further,
when you attempt a task to perform repairs to a
starship or attempt to push the ship’s capabilities be-
yond its normal limits, you may spend 1 Momentum
(Immediate) to re-roll a d20.
CHIEF OF SECURITY
The chief of security oversees the ship’s security depart-
ment and is responsible for ensuring the safety of the
ship and crew during missions, for the investigation of
disciplinary and criminal matters, and for overseeing the
protection of important persons aboard the ship.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: You reduce the opportunity cost of
weapons and security teams by 1, to a minimum of
0. Further, when you succeed at an Attack against
an enemy during personal combat, you may spend 1
Momentum to increase the Difficulty of that enemy’s
next Attack by 1.
MICHELE
FRIGO
CHIEF TACTICAL OFFICER
A presence on 22nd and 23rd century Starfleet ships, and
common in other organizations, this role is also known
as an armory officer or weapons officer. The officer is re-
sponsible for the upkeep and use of the ship’s armaments
and is typically an expert in ship-to-ship combat.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: When you succeed at an Attack
with the ship’s weapons, you may increase the
damage rating of that weapon system by spending 1
Momentum rather than 2.
FLIGHT CONTROLLER
Also known as a helmsman on 22nd and 23rd century
Starfleet vessels. Not a typical senior staff role, though
some captains, particularly those operating in unchart-
ed space, choose the most senior helmsman or flight
control officer to serve on the senior staff.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: When you attempt an engineering
task related to flight or propulsion, you may use your
Conn rating instead of Engineering. When you suc-
ceed at a Conn task to pilot a starship, you generate
1 bonus Momentum to be used on that task (bonus
Momentum may not be saved).
NAVIGATOR
On vessels exploring the uncharted frontiers of space, a
skilled navigator, astrometrics officer, or stellar cartog-
rapher plots courses, studies and updates astrometrics
charts and data, and supports the helmsman or flight
controller. Navigators are rarely called to serve on the
senior staff.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: When you attempt a science task
related to astrophysics or stellar navigation, you
may use your Conn rating instead of Science. When
you attempt or Assist a task to maneuver a starship
through difficult or dangerous terrain, you may spend
1 Momentum to ignore a complication suffered
(Repeatable).
SCIENCE OFFICER
The science officer (sometimes referred to as the chief
science officer) is responsible for advising the com-
manding officer on all scientific matters, providing hy-
potheses concerning the unknown. The science officer
is also responsible for all science personnel on the ship
or station.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: When you succeed at a task assisted
by the ship’s Sensors or Computers, or a task using
a tricorder or other sensing device, you may ask one
additional question as if you had spent Momentum on
Obtain Information.
CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER
The chief medical officer is responsible for the health
and well-being of the crew and other people aboard the
ship and leads the ship’s medical department. A chief
medical officer can order, and countermand the orders
of, senior officers where matters of that officer’s health
are concerned. In extreme situations, the chief medical
officer can declare an officer unfit and remove them
from active duty (including the commanding officer).
A ship may have either a chief medical officer or a
ship’s doctor.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: You reduce the opportunity cost
of medical equipment and medical teams by 1, to a
minimum of 0. Further, when you attempt a task using
your Medicine rating, and you have assistance, you
generate 1 bonus Momentum (bonus Momentum
may not be saved).
SHIP’S DOCTOR
You care for the crew of your ship, or the station you
serve on (in which case, rename the role to Station’s
Doctor), but unlike a chief medical officer, you do not
have an extensive medical department to manage or to
aid you. This is common in smaller crews which do not
require a large sickbay or infirmary and tends to mean
these smaller postings favor generalists who can adapt
to a variety of circumstances.
A ship may have either a chief medical officer or a
ship’s doctor.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: You have two additional focus-
es, which must relate to medicine fields of study.
However, your ship cannot use Crew Support to
introduce supporting characters who are medical
personnel.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
137
SHIP’S (OR STATION’S) COUNSELOR
On larger ships and starbases, it’s common (especially in
the 24th century and beyond) to have personnel dedicat-
ed to the mental well-being of the crew. Some captains
regard them as valuable advisors, as their training covers
both culture and psychology, making them exceptionally
good at reading the moods and intentions of others.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: When you Assist a character suf-
fering from a trait representing a negative emotional
state, you may re-roll your assist die. Additionally,
once per mission, you may spend a scene counseling
a character who has challenged one of their values
during the current mission. At the end of the scene,
the character may rewrite their crossed-out value
immediately, rather than waiting until the end of
the mission. If they do this, they immediately gain 1
Determination as well.
COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER
More common in the earlier days of Starfleet, dedicated
communications officers are typically skilled in linguis-
tics and cryptography, and aided with advanced transla-
tion and decryption technologies, and are valuable dur-
ing encounters with new cultures, hostile or otherwise.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: When you attempt a task assisted by
the ship’s Computers or Communications systems, do
not roll the ship’s assist die: instead, count the ship’s
die as if it had rolled a 1.
: . Other Roles
Not all characters serve in Starfleet or in other civiliza-
tion’s space exploration organizations. Review the list of
additional roles below and select one as desired.
BODYGUARD
You specialize in personal security, protecting an
individual, whether a paying client, or someone you
were assigned to. Militaries tend not to employ specific
bodyguards in this sense, but they may have specialists
trained in protecting important personnel—ambassa-
dors, admirals, political figures, and similar—as needed.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: Choose a single character—another
player character or an NPC—who you are assigned
to protect. When you are in the same zone as that
character, you may spend 1 Momentum (Immediate)
when that character is attacked to have the Attack
target you instead. If you do this, the attack’s Difficulty
is increased by 1.
138
CHAPTER 4
EXPERT
You are an expert in a particular field, working alongside
the crew to consult upon a matter related to your exper-
tise. You are highly specialized and extremely capable
in your chosen field, but this may lead you to ignore or
overlook things that fall outside your knowledge or result
in an obsession that causes you to prioritize your work
over other concerns.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: You gain one additional value, which
must reflect the importance of your work to you. In
addition, select one of your focuses—this is the field
you are an expert in. When you use this focus on a
task and succeed, you generate 1 bonus Momentum
(bonus Momentum may not be saved).
INTELLIGENCE AGENT
You are not a traditional part of the fleet. Instead, you
are an operative of the intelligence services of your
civilization. You are charged with gathering information
from places and people that don’t want their information
gathered, and you achieve this through a combination
of your own skills and the network of informants and
contacts you have cultivated.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: Once per adventure, you may cre-
ate a trait without requiring a task or spending any
Momentum, Threat, or Determination. This trait must
reflect information, physical resources, or access to a
location (such as access codes or identification data)
provided to you by a contact or by your agency.
MERCHANT
You’re a merchant or trader, exchanging valuable goods
for latinum or other goods. Even in the Federation,
merchants are necessary for ensuring resources can
easily move from place to place. The Federation and
its members maintain reserves of latinum and other
precious commodities to allow them to trade with
other civilizations. In a practical sense, merchants are
well-connected and often have access to unusual items
or specialized resources not usually available.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: Once per adventure, you can ignore
the opportunity costs on up to three items of equip-
ment being acquired by other player characters. You
may even allow other player characters to obtain
items not normally available to them (such as disrup-
tors to a Starfleet crew, or items which are restricted
or illegal), though you add 1 Threat for each such
item provided.
POLITICAL LIAISON
You serve as a representative of a government, repre-
senting their needs and interests during the operations
of the crew, and providing the crew with a means of com-
municating with that government in turn. This is often the
case where multiple groups are required to coexist, such
as a Starfleet facility operating close to an allied non-Fed-
eration world, or as part of a joint operation between
Starfleet and Klingon Defense Force personnel.
TRANSLATOR
You are an expert in language and communication. While
the development of the universal translator has reduced
the need for translators during daily life in the 23rd and
24th centuries, there are still situations which call for
experts in linguistics. Encounters with new cultures often
require support from xenolinguistics experts to smooth
over any problems that the universal translator has,
particularly if a culture has an unusual style or method
of communication. Similarly, archaeological research
often requires piecing together extinct languages from
evidence in ways that can’t easily be automated.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: You represent the official govern-
ment your organization belongs to—i.e., if you are
a member of the Bajoran Militia, you represent the
current Bajoran government. You gain an additional
Directive, which only applies to you, which reflects
the political stance of the government you represent.
Your gamemaster will work with you to determine the
wording of this Directive. It serves to provide you with
a source of complications and potential restrictions
when acting against the interests of your government,
and benefits when you are acting with the full support
of your superiors.
§ ROLE BENEFIT: When attempting to read, understand,
or speak a language unfamiliar to you, you may spend
2 Momentum (Immediate) to piece together a basic
understanding of that language immediately, enough
to convey simple ideas. This allows social tasks to be
attempted in this language, but the complication range
of these tasks is increased to 18–20. Deeper study, at
the gamemaster’s discretion, allows you to remove this
penalty and discuss more complex ideas.
MICHELE FRIGO
REPORTING FOR DUTy
139
RANK
STARFLEET CHARACTERS, AND PERSONNEL FROM
similar organizations, have a rank within their organiza-
tion. Once the characters’ roles have been determined,
military or Starfleet characters should determine their
ranks. A character can be of any rank, though there are
a few restrictions in specific circumstances. The choice
 Starfleet Officers
§ FLEET ADMIRAL: The highest flag officer rank
§ ADMIRAL: Flag officer
§ VICE-ADMIRAL: Flag officer
§ REAR ADMIRAL: Flag officer
§ COMMODORE: Flag officer. Occasionally this rank is
referred to as “rear admiral, lower half.”
§ FLEET CAPTAIN: Fleet captain is a rare rank given to
the most respected captains. Sometimes this is an
honorary title more than an actual rank.
§ CAPTAIN: Most commanding officers hold this rank;
commanding officers who do not are often referred to
as captains out of tradition.
§ COMMANDER: This is the lowest rank a command-
ing officer may have under normal circumstances.
§ LIEUTENANT COMMANDER: This rank is the lowest
rank that may be taken by an officer with the Veteran tal-
ent. Commonly referred to as “commander” for brevity.
§ LIEUTENANT: A mid-level ranked officer.
§ LIEUTENANT (JUNIOR GRADE): This rank is the
highest rank that may be taken by an officer with the
Untapped Potential talent.
§ ENSIGN: This is the lowest rank available to any com-
missioned officer.
§ CADET: Starfleet Academy students are referred to
as cadets, usually with their year (first-year cadet,
third-year cadet, etc.). Upon graduation, cadets are
commissioned as ensigns, or rarely, as lieutenants
(junior grade).
140
CHAPTER 4
made in Step Five: Experience may limit which ranks
the character may choose from.
Civilian characters do not need to select a rank, though
they may have a title they wish to be referred as, such as
Doctor, Professor, Ambassador, or the like.
 Starfleet
Enlisted Crew
Enlisted Starfleet personnel use the following ranks.
All enlisted crew are outranked by any commissioned
officer (even the newest ensign), but more experienced
enlisted personnel have expertise and influence far
beyond their actual rank.
§ MASTER CHIEF PETTY OFFICER: The most senior
non-commissioned officer (NCO). Normally ad-
dressed as master chief or simply chief.
§ SENIOR CHIEF PETTY OFFICER: Non-
commissioned officer. Normally addressed as chief.
§ CHIEF PETTY OFFICER: Non-commissioned officer.
Normally addressed as chief. This is the lowest rank
that may be taken by an enlisted character with the
Veteran talent.
§ PETTY OFFICER (1ST CLASS, 2ND CLASS, OR 3RD
CLASS): Non-commissioned officer. The highest rank
that can be taken by an enlisted character with the
Untapped Potential talent.
§ CREWMAN (1ST CLASS, 2ND CLASS, OR 3RD
CLASS): Often, personnel of this rank will be addressed
by a title according to their duties, such as boatswain
(pronounced “bo’sun”) specialist, technician, or yeoman.
EQUIPMENT
COMMON ITEMS OF EQUIPMENT ARE READILY AVAIL-
able to most characters; the prevalence of replicators
means most routine tools are easily within reach.
Starfleet and military personnel, and those representing
their government, are well-provisioned, ensuring they
have the tools to achieve their jobs.
It’s assumed a character will probably have an assort-
ment of personal belongings—clothing, mementos of
past experiences, art and other decorations, items rele-
vant to pastimes, and so forth—but these are not really a
concern within the rules.
All Starfleet and military characters receive their uni-
forms. The precise style of uniform will vary based on
the era, and on the preferences of the commanding
officer. Individual characters may have alterations or
additional elements on their uniforms—such as a devo-
tional earring for Bajorans, or a lab coat for medical per-
sonnel—as desired. Characters receive duty uniforms
appropriate for their department and their duties, as well
as a dress uniform for formal occasions.
Characters also receive a personal subspace commu-
nicator. This may take different forms depending on the
era; hand-held communicators are commonplace in the
22nd and 23rd centuries, while the 24th century saw the
introduction of communicator badges, or combadges,
worn on the uniform. The 32nd century Starfleet had
combadges worn on the uniform as well, with additional
functionality as a personal transporter.
All characters have access to tricorders. They aren’t car-
ried all the time, but tricorders can be found in storage
bays across a starship, and are standard issue for away
missions, so if a character needs a tricorder, it isn’t diffi-
cult to obtain one. Characters from the medical division
may use a medical tricorder instead.
Beyond that, characters may have common tools on
hand for their day-to-day duties. Any character from the
engineering division may carry an engineer’s toolkit,
while characters from the medical division may carry a
medkit. Similarly, a character with a trait representing a
weakness, flaw, or disability, or whose species cannot
easily function in an Earth-standard environment, re-
ceives appropriate equipment to allow them to compen-
sate for these difficulties.
Standard Issue Phaser
(mid 23rd century)
Finally, Starfleet and military characters receive a side-
arm for personal defense. All Starfleet personnel receive
a phaser type-1 as standard. All security personnel, and
all senior officers (lieutenant commander and higher
rank) receive a phaser type-2 as their sidearm instead.
Military characters carry a phaser type-2 or disruptor
pistol (or a comparable weapon, at the gamemaster’s
discretion). Civilian characters do not receive a sidearm
as standard.
Other equipment is either obtained as required by the
mission or as part of a character's personal effects.
Weapons and gear are described in more detail in
Chapter 6, starting on page 241.
In summary, a starting character has the following items:
§ Uniforms
§ Communicator
§ Tricorder
§ Sidearm (Starfleet and military characters)
§ Tools (by duty or role; not all characters will have these)
REPORTING FOR DUTy
141
: . CHAPTER 4.3
CREATION IN PLAY
“We learn by doing.
- Admiral James T. Kirk
CREATION IN PLAY
SUMMARY
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
DOCTOR VORAAL
The creation in play
method allows you
to partially create
your character in a
few minutes, while
leaving many of the
details undefined.
Those details are
determined during play
itself, revealing the
character through their
choices and actions
in the same way a
character’s capabilities
are introduced to an
audience watching
a television show or
movie.
WHILE CREATION IN PLAY IS A SIM-
pler and swifter method of character
generation over the lifepath, it requires
you to know what you want your char-
acter to do before play begins. For this
reason, some elements left until last in
lifepath creation are determined up front
with creation in play.
Creation in play consists of the follow-
ing steps:
: . Choose the
Character’s Role
First, determine the role you intend
the character to fill. This is the same
as choosing the character’s role at the
end of lifepath creation (page 135),
only the rest of the character’s details
have not yet been determined. Instead,
the character will be created to fill that
role, rather than choosing a role once
the character has been completed.
This should also define the character’s
purpose, and which division of Starfleet
(if applicable) they are in. You should
also note the equipment the character
will start with.
After this, select a trait to reflect the
character’s career, such as Starfleet
Officer or Diplomat.
: . Assign the
Character’s
Attributes
Now, assign the character’s attributes.
You have the following ratings to assign
to the character’s attributes, in any
order: 10, 10, 9, 9, 8, 7.
Step one
Choose the character’s role.
Step Two
Assign the character’s attributes.
Step Three
Choose the character’s species.
Step Four
Assign the character’s primary
departments.
Step Five
Choose a single value.
Step Six
Begin play!
142
CHAPTER 4
: . Choose the
Character’s Species
Next, select your character’s species. Choose from the
options found in the lifepath creation rules, starting on
page 100. Then, increase the character’s attributes as
described in the entry for the Species chosen.
Finally, note the trait and Species Ability.
: . Assign the Character’s
Primary Departments
Next, choose two departments. If the character is
Starfleet, one of these should match the division the
character is part of (i.e., a medical officer chooses
Medicine). Otherwise, they can be chosen freely.
Assign ratings to these departments—either a 5 and a 3,
or two 4s. Leave the other four department ratings blank
at this stage. They will be determined during play.
: . Choose a Single Value
Finally, choose a single value. This value should reflect
the basic concept for the character. The character’s
other values will be determined during play.
: . Begin Play!
The character should have their role, their species
(including the accompanying trait and Species Ability), a
full range of attributes, two of their six departments, and
a single value. This is all you need to get started.
The gamemaster should then begin play, devising a
mission for a group of partially created characters. This
scenario shouldn’t be too complex or involved, as it
mainly serves as an opportunity to introduce and flesh
out the characters. During this mission, each main
character should have an opportunity to show off their
skills. Each character will have the following elements
left undetermined:
§ VALUES: The character has three values left unde-
fined. When attempting a task, the player may declare
that they’re defining one of their remaining values.
The player chooses a value applicable to the task
they’re attempting, and immediately gains a point of
Determination, which may be used with that value
right away.
§ DEPARTMENTS: The character has four depart-
ments left undefined. Whenever called upon to
attempt a task that would use an undefined depart-
ment, the player may declare that they’re choosing
to define that department. The character’s remaining
departments may be given one of the following rat-
ings: 3, 2, 2, and 1. Each one of those ratings may only
be used once. The task is then attempted using that
newly defined department.
§ FOCUSES: The character has all six focuses left
undefined (plus any additional focuses granted by
species, talents, etc.). Whenever called upon to
attempt a task, the player may declare that they’re
choosing to define one of their focuses. The player
chooses a focus applicable to the task being at-
tempted. The task is then attempted using the newly
defined focus.
§ TALENTS: The character has four talents left un-
defined. At any point during the session, the player
may declare they’re choosing to define one of their
talents; this may even be in the middle of resolving
a task. The player chooses one talent, for which the
character must meet the requirements (if any). Play
then resumes with the character gaining the ben-
efits of that talent. However, the character may not
retroactively benefit from having the talent—they
cannot change things that happened before the
talent was gained.
§ PASTIME: The character may define one or more
pastimes as desired (see page 133 for more informa-
tion on pastimes).
Once the first adventure concludes, the main charac-
ters should be fully developed. If any characters still
have elements undefined, the players should feel free
to decide upon those elements either after the first
adventure, or leave them undefined until subsequent
adventures, much as how the characters on the various
series become more fully realized over the course of
several episodes.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
143
: . CHAPTER 4.4
SUPPORTING CHARACTERS
“Ugh, senior officers are overrated. They’re always
like stressed out and just yelling about directives.
It is better down here where the real action is.
- Ensign Beckett Mariner
SUPPORTING CHARACTERS ARE CRE-
ated and controlled by the players
during a game of Star Trek Adventures.
Supporting characters:
§ Represent the rest of the crew in
play, giving the players subordinates
to play.
§ Enable players to take on different
roles, allowing them to capitalize on a
skillset that doesn’t exist among the
main characters, to play a more active
role in an adventure that doesn’t
focus on their main character, or ac-
count for players who are absent.
§ Permit the players to split their char-
acters among different activities in
different locations without being left
out of the game.
§ Allow smaller groups of players
to bolster their numbers during
challenges and extended tasks,
such as by ensuring enough
bridge stations are manned during
a space battle.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
DOCTOR VORAAL
Main characters are
rarely present in every
moment of a given
mission. When your
player character is
involved in a situation
and cannot logically
be part of the next
scene, you may choose
to use a supporting
character.
Supporting characters
are less detailed than
main characters and are
not permanently owned
by a single player.
Instead, supporting
characters are created
when circumstances
require them and are
available to the whole
group, so that all
players can be involved
in every scene, even if
their main characters
cannot.
USING SUPPORTING
CHARACTERS
AT THE START OF A SCENE, A PLAYER
may choose which character they are
using: their main character or one of
the supporting characters currently
available, or a supporting character they
create on the spot. For the duration of
that scene, that player will control the
character they have chosen—the char-
acter chosen is a player character.
The player, and the gamemaster, should
keep in mind where the main charac-
ters and supporting characters are at
different times, and it will typically be
the case that a player will choose a
character located in the scene being
established. However, this means that if
the gamemaster ends a scene, and then
establishes the next scene in a location
occupied by a different set of charac-
ters, the players can easily switch to the
appropriate characters without having
to stop and figure out who is and isn’t
involved.
If a player has multiple characters in
a single scene, the player may not
directly control those other characters.
Characters not under the direct control
of a player cannot perform the full range
of actions and tasks available to a char-
acter under a player’s control. Instead,
they can perform the following:
§ MINOR ACTIONS: An uncontrolled
character will perform whatever
minor actions or other incidental
activities are needed to keep up with
the player characters, or to follow the
orders of player-controlled characters
with authority over them.
144
CHAPTER 4
§ MAJOR ACTIONS: An uncontrolled character cannot
attempt any major action that includes a task that has
a Difficulty above 0 unless they’ve been ordered to do
so using the Direct action. Uncontrolled characters
may, however, use the Assist task to benefit player
characters, though they may only do so once per
round in combat.
§ COMBAT: Uncontrolled characters do not receive a
turn during combat; instead, an uncontrolled char-
acter’s major and minor actions (per the limitations
above) are resolved as part of the actions of player
characters—the uncontrolled characters follow the
orders of their superiors immediately.
§ COMPLICATIONS AND INJURY: Uncontrolled
characters can be Injured and Defeated, and can
suffer complications as normal. However, an uncon-
trolled character may not choose to avoid an Injury.
Further, in any situation where a player character
PAOLO PUGIONNI
would become Injured, and there are one or more
uncontrolled characters in the scene, the player may
choose to have the uncontrolled character suffer the
Injury instead. In the case of an Injury, the uncon-
trolled character is immediately Defeated, and if the
Injury was Deadly, they will require medical attention
or die. If a player character suffers an Injury or is
otherwise incapacitated, their player may immediately
choose to take over an uncontrolled character for the
remainder of the scene.
Further, uncontrolled characters can be treated as a
trait, to allow a task to be attempted which would oth-
erwise be impossible (for activities that would require
multiple people), or to reduce the Difficulty of a task—
simply providing an extra pair of hands and an extra set
of senses can be valuable.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
145
CREATING A SUPPORTING CHARACTER
THE NUMBER OF SUPPORTING CHARACTERS PRES-
ent during any game is variable, and players do not
inherently own any supporting characters—though they
can lay claim to them during play, for the duration of
that adventure.
 Advancement for
Supporting Characters
A group of players will have a maximum number of sup-
porting characters that can be used during a single ad-
venture; this number is the Crew Support of the group’s
ship (Crew Support is described more in Chapter 5 on
page 185). During an adventure, players may choose
to introduce one or more supporting characters at the
start of any scene, either creating those characters
anew or choosing from previously created supporting
characters. The total number of supporting characters
introduced during the adventure cannot exceed the
Crew Support.
Once a supporting character has selected all the im-
provement options listed above, they are as capable and
detailed as a main character, but with few opportunities
to develop further. At the gamemaster’s discretion, there
are a few possibilities to advance a supporting character
further.
MAIN CAST: If a new player joins the group, or an exist-
ing main character is killed or otherwise leaves the game
(perhaps promoted, assigned to another ship, or retired),
a fully developed supporting character can be used as a
replacement main character.
PROMOTION: The supporting character joins the senior
staff and selects a role—gaining the accompanying role
benefit—if they did not have one before. The supporting
character’s rank is increased accordingly.
Note that previously created supporting characters do
not count against this number until they are introduced
in play, and during a prolonged campaign a group may
create many supporting characters, not all of whom will
appear in every session.
When creating a supporting character, use the proce-
dure opposite.
Whenever a supporting character is introduced to an
adventure, and this is not the first time they have been
introduced (i.e., they have been introduced before), they
receive an improvement, meaning the player introducing
them may choose one of the following options:
REASSIGNMENT: The supporting character departs,
perhaps to a new posting on a different ship. While
they can no longer be used as a supporting character,
they can be a useful contact elsewhere in the fleet,
and someone who can provide plot hooks or assis-
tance. They could even become a main character in a
friend’s Star Trek Adventures campaign, similar to the
way Chief O’Brien went from a recurring character in
Star Trek: The Next Generation to a main character in
Star Trek: Deep Space Nine.
§ VALUES: The supporting character gains a single
value. This option may be chosen up to four times,
gaining a new value each time. Once a supporting
character has at least one value, they also gain a
Stress track, and can take Stress to avoid Injuries and
other consequences.
§ ATTRIBUTES: The supporting character increases a
single attribute by 1. This option may only be chosen
once.
§ DEPARTMENTS: The supporting character increases
a single department by 1. This option may only be
chosen once.
§ FOCUSES: The supporting character chooses one
additional focus. This option may be chosen three
times, gaining a new focus each time.
§ TALENTS: The supporting character gains a single
talent that they meet the requirements for. This option
may be chosen four times, gaining a different talent
each time.
Once all the improvement options listed above have
been taken, a supporting character cannot improve
further simply by being introduced to an adventure.
However, supporting characters can also be improved
as part of a main character’s advancement—reflecting
a main character training and developing the personnel
under them.
146
CHAPTER 4
SUPPORTING CHARACTER
CREATION
 Supervisory
Characters
Step one: Purpose
Determine what purpose the supporting character will
fill. Are they an engineer, or a doctor, or a scientist, or a
security officer? This will shape the rest of the character.
This includes choosing a department for the character.
Create a trait to describe the supporting character’s
role or purpose, such as Starfleet Enlisted Crew or
Diplomatic Aide.
The mechanics for supporting characters assume they
are being used to create and play subordinates, charac-
ters of lower rank and status while the player characters
are more important and of higher rank. If you’re playing
lower ranking characters—perhaps a group of scrappy
ensigns or enlisted crew, in the style of Lower Decks—
this might not be the right fit: in such a game, the sup-
porting cast would be the senior staff, like the captain,
XO, chief engineer, and so forth.
Alternatively, it may be that a senior role in the ship’s
crew isn’t filled by a player’s main character, so creating
a supporting character to fill that role is the next best
thing, allowing them to appear in adventures where
they’re relevant.
Step Two: Attributes
Assign the character’s attribute ratings. The character
will have attribute ratings of 10, 9, 9, 8, 8, and 7, arranged
in any order. Also at this stage, choose the character’s
Species, and note down their species trait, their Species
Ability, and adjust the attributes accordingly.
Supervisory characters are created in the same way as
supporting characters, with the following changes:
Step Three: Departments
Assign the character’s departments. The character will
have department ratings of 4, 3, 2, 2, 1, and 1, arranged
in any order. The character’s highest department should
match up with the department chosen in step one.
Step Four: Focuses
Choose three focuses for the character. At least one
of these should match up with the purpose defined in
step one.
§ When you create or introduce a supervisory charac-
ter, you must spend 2 points of Crew Support rather
than 1: senior officers are rarer and have more de-
manding duties, so they’re more costly to introduce.
§ ATTRIBUTES: When you assign the character’s attrib-
utes, their ratings are 10, 10, 9, 9, 8, and 8, arranged
in any order. Apply the character’s Species attribute
modifiers.
§ DEPARTMENTS: When you assign the character’s
departments, they have ratings of 4, 4, 3, 2, 2, and 1,
arranged in any order.
§ FOCUSES: The character begins with four focuses,
instead of three.
§ VALUES: The character begins with one value. As a
result, they have one Determination when they are
first introduced during an adventure.
§ FINAL STEPS: In addition to the other details, a
supervisory character has a maximum Stress rating
equal to their Fitness, like a main character.
Step Five: Finishing Up
Finally, give the character their standard issue equip-
ment and choose an appropriate name and rank for the
character. Supporting characters should never have a
rank above lieutenant, and may often be enlisted person-
nel rather than officers.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
147
: . CHAPTER 4.5
TALENTS
ALL MAIN CHARACTERS AND MANY
non-player characters are exceptional
individuals, capable of facing most
challenges the Galaxy has to offer.
These characters often have tricks
or knacks that help them overcome
impossible odds and triumph when
others might falter. These particular
abilities are represented as talents.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
DOCTOR VORAAL
As a doctor, I can tell
you any being is more
than the sum of their
parts. Similarly, were
you to only review
a main character’s
attributes, departments,
and focuses, you
would not have a true
understanding of
their full capabilities.
Starfleet and similar
organizations accept
only the brightest
individuals, and even
then, only the very best
rise to the challenges
of command: in game
terms, it is a character’s
talents setting these
individuals apart.
This chapter explains
how talents work
and presents a
comprehensive list of
talents you may choose
from to enhance and
elevate your character.
Every main character built through the
lifepath begins play with four talents,
most of which are directly related to one
of the six departments, enhancing how
the character employs their training and
expertise.
Careful talent selection helps a char-
acter feel distinct and dynamic in play.
The ratings a character possesses in
attributes and departments are a solid
foundation, but the actions the character
takes are usually the most memorable
things about them. Talents provide a
way to alter and influence those actions.
Some talents have one or more specific
requirements. These are conditions that
must be fulfilled before the talent can be
selected, such as belonging to a specific
species or having a department at a
specific rating.
148
CHAPTER 4
“Can I cook, or can’t I?
- Dr. Carol Marcus
Each talent also has a condition and a
benefit. The condition is the circum-
stances under which the talent can be
used.
The benefit is what the character gains
from meeting that condition. This bene-
fit serves as an exception to the rules as
written in some way, illustrating how the
character is exceptional. Some of these
conditions are mechanical in nature—
using a specific game option or suc-
ceeding at a specific kind of task—while
others may be more narrative.
Most talents are available to all char-
acters, regardless of species. Unless
otherwise noted, each talent may be
selected only once. Players are free to
rename the talents to suit their tastes
and the backgrounds of their charac-
ters; this will not affect the rules for that
talent in any way. Note the original name
of the talent in case someone raises a
question about it.
You might choose to spread out your
choice of talents to apply to a wide
range of situations, or to have them
all work on the same narrow range of
circumstances. You have the choice
between versatility and specialization.
GENERAL TALENTS
THESE TALENTS ARE COMMON TO CHARACTERS OF
all types.
: . Back-Up Plans
REQUIREMENT: Control 9+
Whenever you or an ally fail a task (so long as you are
present in the scene), you may add 1 point to the group’s
Momentum pool.
: . Bold (X)
Choose a department when you select this talent.
Whenever you attempt a task from that department, and
you buy one or more d20s by adding Threat, you may re-roll
a single d20. You may select this talent multiple times, once
for each department. You may not select this talent for
any department for which you have the Cautious talent.
: . Calm and Logical
REQUIREMENT: Reason 11+
When you gain a trait which represents a mood or
emotional state, you may suppress that trait (ignoring its
effect) for the duration of a single task or a single turn in
combat by suffering 1 Stress.
: . Cautious (X)
Choose a department when you select this talent.
Whenever you attempt a task with that department, and
you buy one or more d20s by spending Momentum,
you may re-roll a single d20. You may select this talent
multiple times, once for each department. You may not
select this talent for any department for which you have
the Bold talent.
: . Close-Knit Crew
When a scene begins, if there are fewer points of
Momentum in the group pool than there are characters
in the scene who have this talent, immediately add 1
Momentum to the group pool.
: . Collaboration (X)
Choose a single department when you select this talent.
Whenever an ally attempts a task using that department,
you may spend 1 Momentum (Immediate) to allow them
to use your rating for that department and one of your
relevant focuses.
: . Constant Presence
REQUIREMENTS: Supporting character only, must have
at least two values and at least two other talents
You’re a regular fixture of away missions and other
important work, relied upon by the senior staff for your
expertise and judgment. Introducing this supporting
character in subsequent adventures no longer costs
Crew Support, and the supporting character gains
1 Determination the first time they are used in an
adventure.
: . Constantly Watching
At the start of an action scene, the gamemaster must
spend an additional 2 Threat to have an NPC take the
first turn. You may also re-roll 1d20 on any task attempt-
ed to locate a hidden enemy or danger.
: . Dauntless
Whenever another character attempts to intimidate or
threaten you, you may suffer 2 Stress to ignore their
attempt.
: . Extra Effort
REQUIREMENT: Fitness 9+
When you attempt a task, you may reduce the Difficulty
of the task by 1, to a minimum of 0. However, once the
task is completed, you immediately take Stress equal to
the original Difficulty of the task.
: . Indefatigable
REQUIREMENT: Fitness 11+
When you fail a task, and attempt that task again during
the same scene, reduce the Difficulty of the second at-
tempt (and any subsequent attempts if you still fail) by 1.
: . Gut Feeling
REQUIREMENT: Insight 11+
When the gamemaster spends Threat to introduce re-
inforcements or to cause a Reversal, they must spend 2
additional Threat to do so. This is 2 extra Threat in total,
not per reinforcement.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
149
: . Methodical Planning
REQUIREMENT: Reason 9+
When an ally attempts a task which benefits from a trait
you created which represents your plan or strategy,
then you may Assist that ally’s task even if you are not
present. In combat, this assistance does not require you
to use your task to Assist that ally.
: . No Hesitation
REQUIREMENT: Daring 9+
At the start of any round in an action scene, you may add
1 Threat to take the first turn, regardless of who would
otherwise have acted first.
: . No Pain, No Gain
REQUIREMENT: Daring 11+
When you fail a task (but not an opposed task) which
used your Daring, you may always choose to Succeed
at Cost.
: . Personal Effects
REQUIREMENT: Main character
You possess some significant and uncommon item or
device which is not standard issue, but which is never-
theless useful for missions. You may select this talent
multiple times, gaining a different item each time.
: . Quick Survey
REQUIREMENT: Insight 9+
At the start of a scene, you may immediately ask one
question, as if you had spent 1 Momentum on the Obtain
Information Momentum Spend. The answer can only
provide information that you could obtain with your own
senses: you cannot gain information from equipment in
such a short time.
: . Reassuring
REQUIREMENT: Presence 9+
When you succeed at a task using your Presence,
you may spend Momentum to reassure your allies,
so long as they are able to hear you. You may spend
1 Momentum (Repeatable) to allow one ally who can
see and hear you to recover 1 Stress. That ally may not
recover more than 3 Stress from one use of this talent.
150
CHAPTER 4
: . Second Wind
You may spend Determination at the start of your turn
to remove the Defeated state, and to recover up to half
of your maximum Stress. The normal requirements for
spending a point of Determination still apply.
: . Self-Reliant
REQUIREMENT: Control 11+
Whenever you succeed at a task where you did not
purchase additional dice by spending Momentum
or adding to Threat, you generate bonus Momentum
equal to the task’s Difficulty. Bonus Momentum cannot
be saved.
: . Studious
Whenever you spend 1 or more Momentum to Obtain
Information, you may ask one additional question (in
total, not per Momentum spent on Obtain Information).
: . Technical Expertise
Whenever you attempt a task assisted by the ship’s
Computers or Sensors, you may re-roll one d20 in your
pool, or you may allow the ship to re-roll its d20.
: . Tough
Your maximum Stress is increased by 2.
: . Voice of Authority
REQUIREMENT: Presence 11+
When you Assist someone, and use your Presence to do
so, you may add 2 Threat to treat your assistance die as
if it had rolled a 1 instead of rolling it.
: . Well-Informed
You have contacts everywhere and you listen to news
and rumors from far and wide. At the start of a scene,
you may add 1 Threat to ask the gamemaster two
questions about the situation or location, as if you had
spent Momentum on the Obtain Information spend.
The answers you receive will be knowledge you’ve
gained from your contacts and the news and rumors
you’ve heard.
SPECIES AND CULTURE TALENTS
SPECIES AND CULTURE TALENTS COVER ABILITIES,
techniques, and tendencies common to specific species
and their cultures. They are typically only available to
members of a specific species but can sometimes be
gained by characters of other species.
EXAMPLE: Michael Burnham, a Human, was
adopted by the Vulcan ambassador, Sarek, and was
raised and educated on Vulcan. Because of this
deep exposure to Vulcan culture and traditions, the
gamemaster allows Michael to select the Nerve
Pinch talent.
: . Chosen Speaker
(Aenar Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Aenar, or gamemaster’s permission
Among Aenar communities, leaders and mediators are
chosen as and when the need arises, nominating an
individual to serve as Speaker. You’ve been chosen for
this role often and are adept at using your senses and
your telepathy to aid communication. When attempting a
task to communicate telepathically with a willing being,
you may re-roll 1d20.
: . Proud and Honorable
(Andorian Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Andorian, or gamemaster’s permission
Whenever you attempt a task to resist being coerced
into breaking a promise, betraying your allies, or other-
wise acting dishonorably, you may add Threat to immedi-
ately succeed at the task. The amount of Threat you add
is equal to the task’s Difficulty.
: . Strong Pagh
(Bajoran Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Bajoran, or gamemaster’s permission
You believe profoundly in the Prophets, and you rely
upon that faith to see you through hardship. Whenever
you attempt a task to resist being coerced or threatened,
you may take Stress equal to the Difficulty of the task to
automatically succeed.
: . The Ushaan
(Andorian Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Andorian, or gamemaster’s permission
You are experienced in the tradition of honor-dueling
known as the Ushaan. When you make a Melee Attack,
or are targeted by a Melee Attack, and buy one or more
d20s by adding to Threat, you may re-roll any number of
dice in your dice pool for the task. Further, you own an
Ushaan-tor, a razor-sharp ice-miner’s tool used in these
duels. The Ushaan-tor is a blade (see page 242), and it
counts as standard issue for you.
: . Acute Senses
(Aenar Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Aenar, or gamemaster’s permission
The Aenar have honed their senses to the point that
they are able to respond to stimuli just as well as, if not
superior to, those who possess the ability to see. When
attempting a task to detect something which is hidden
from conventional senses, or which would normally be
difficult to perceive, you may re-roll 1d20.
: . Orb Experience
(Bajoran Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Bajoran, or gamemaster’s permission
You have received a vision from the Bajoran Prophets,
through one of the Orbs. This rare experience, though
confusing at first, has shaped your life and outlook.
You have one additional value, which represents some
prophecy or insight into the future gained from your
vision. Furthermore, once per session, when that value
is used, you gain twice the normal benefit: if you spend
Determination, you may gain two benefits listed, while
if you would gain Determination, you gain 2 points
instead of 1.
: . Open Book
(Betazoid Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Betazoid, or gamemaster’s permission
When a character enters a scene, you may spend 1
Momentum (Immediate) to immediately ask the gam-
emaster one question about that character’s current
emotions or surface thoughts. You cannot do this for
characters immune to telepathy.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
151
: . Abrupt Insights
(Betazoid Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Betazoid, or gamemaster’s permission
Your insight into the minds of others can give you an
edge when interacting with them, though not everyone
is comfortable having someone else speak their mind.
When you attempt a task as part of a social conflict, you
can increase the complication range by 1, 2, or 3; if you
succeed, you generate bonus Momentum equal to the
complication range increase. Bonus Momentum may
not be saved.
: . Regimented Mind
(Cardassian Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Cardassian, or gamemaster’s
permission
When you spend Momentum to Obtain Information, you
may reduce the Difficulty of one task later in the same
scene by 1, so long as that task relates to the informa-
tion gained.
: . The Ends
Justify the Means
(Cardassian Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Cardassian, or gamemaster’s
permission
When you spend Determination because of a Directive,
you may select two of the benefits for spending
Determination, rather than one.
: . Cultural Flexibility
(Denobulan Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Denobulan, or gamemaster’s
permission
You are at ease when meeting new cultures, and you
adapt to unfamiliar social structures easily. When you
attempt a task to learn about an unfamiliar culture, or
to act in an appropriate manner when interacting with
members of such a culture, you may re-roll 1d20.
152
CHAPTER 4
: . Parent Figure
(Denobulan Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Denobulan, or gamemaster’s
permission
You have a large family, with many children, nieces, and
nephews, and you’ve learned how to coordinate even
the most unruly and fractious of groups when neces-
sary. When attempting or assisting a task, and two or
more other characters are involved in the task, the first
complication generated on the task—either by the char-
acter attempting the task, or one of the assistants—may
be ignored.
: . Greed is Eternal
(Ferengi Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Ferengi, or gamemaster’s permission
When engaged in negotiations—including in social con-
flict—that have the potential for you to profit personally,
you may add 1 Threat to re-roll your dice pool.
: . Never Place
Friendship Above Profit
(Ferengi Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Ferengi, or gamemaster’s permission
When you assist someone else (including using the
Direct action), and one or more complications occur,
you may add 1 Threat to avoid suffering any ill-effect
from that complication (other characters involved are
affected normally).
: . Resolute
(Human Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Humans, or gamemaster’s permission
Your Maximum Stress increases by an amount equal to
your Command rating.
: . Spirit of Discovery
(Human Talent)
REQUIREMENT: Human, or gamemaster’s permission
You have an additional option you may pick when you
spend Determination: you may immediately add 3
Momentum to the group pool.
MARTIN SOBR
: . Killer’s Instinct
(Klingon Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Klingon, or gamemaster’s permission
So familiar are you with the intent to kill that you can
even see it in others when you look them in the eyes.
When you make a Deadly Attack, reduce the amount you
add to Threat to 0. In addition, when an enemy attempts
to make a Deadly Attack against you, you may add 1
Threat to increase the Difficulty of their Attack by 1, as
you react to their intent.
: . Warrior’s Spirit
(Klingon Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Klingon, or gamemaster’s permission
When you make a Melee Attack, or are targeted by a
Melee Attack, and you buy one or more d20s by adding
Threat, you may re-roll the dice pool for your task roll.
Further, you own either a mek’leth (a blade) or a bat’leth
(a heavy blade) at your discretion, which counts as
standard issue for you.
: . Pheromones
(Orion Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Orion female, or gamemaster’s
permission
You are capable of emitting pheromones which can
render Orion males (and others) suggestible. These
pheromones affect several other species—including
Humans—in a similar way. When dealing with males
of a species affected by these pheromones, you gain 2
bonus Momentum on all tasks to persuade or command
them. However, female members of species affected
often suffer headaches because of the pheromones,
increasing the complication range of tasks to interact
with them by 1. Vulcans are known to be unaffected,
while Denobulans experience a different effect and
become drowsy. The gamemaster’s discretion applies
as to which species are affected, which are immune, and
which suffer unexpected effects, but most species are
affected similarly to Humans and Orions.
: . That Wasn’t Me
(Orion Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Orion, or gamemaster’s permission
The Orions are known as one of the most untrustworthy
species in the Galaxy, next to the Ferengi, and yet people
are willing to do business with them or are often tricked
or misled by them. You’ve learned the subtle interplay
of social interactions, reputations, and plausible denials
that allow others to trust you despite what they’ve heard
about ‘those other Orions’. When another character at-
tempts a task to determine if they can trust you, you may
spend 2 Momentum if you are sincere, or add 2 Threat if
you’re attempting to deceive them. Either way, the char-
acter does not need to make a task roll: you convince
them you are trustworthy.
: . Guile and Cunning
(Romulan Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Romulan, or gamemaster’s permission
When you attempt to remain hidden or for your actions
to remain unnoticed, you may add 1 Threat to add 1
to the Difficulty of any task to detect you or reveal the
nature of your actions.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
153
: . Wary
(Romulan Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Romulan, or gamemaster’s permission
When you attempt a task to detect an enemy or hazard,
you may re-roll one d20.
: . Incisive Scrutiny
(Tellarite Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Tellarite, or gamemaster’s permission
When you succeed at a task using Control or Insight, you
may ask one question, as if you had spent Momentum to
Obtain Information.
: . Asking the
Right Questions
(Tellarite Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Tellarite, or gamemaster’s permission
When you attempt a task that relates to information
you’ve received from Obtain Information questions in the
current scene, you may re-roll 1d20.
: . Joined
(Trill Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Trill, or gamemaster’s permission
You are bonded with a symbiont and have lifetimes of
memories to draw upon. You gain an additional charac-
ter trait, which is the name of the symbiont; this reflects
potential advantages of being Joined, as well as the
ability to perform rites and rituals to awaken past hosts’
memories, and the vulnerabilities inherent in the connec-
tion. Furthermore, up to twice per adventure, you may
declare that a past Host had experience or expertise in a
particular field: you gain an additional focus when you do
this, which remains for the rest of the adventure.
: . Former Initiate
(Trill Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Trill, or gamemaster’s permission
You joined the Initiate Program, hoping to be chosen
by the Symbiosis Commission to become Joined. As
there are far more Initiates than there are symbionts,
you were one of many who failed, but the capabili-
ties of even a failed Initiate are highly sought after by
Starfleet and other organizations. When you attempt
a task using Control or Reason, and you spend
Determination to set a die as a 1, you may also re-roll
your dice pool after the roll. You cannot select this
talent if you have the Joined talent.
154
CHAPTER 4
: . Kolinahr
(Vulcan Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Vulcan, or gamemaster’s permission
You have undergone the ritual journey to purge all
emotion, allowing you to dispassionately observe and
dissect your emotional responses and render them
powerless. When you ignore emotions using your
Mental Discipline Species Ability, you may avoid
emotional traits by taking 1 Stress instead of 2, and you
no longer increase the potency of emotional traits when
Fatigued.
: . Mind Meld
Vulcan Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Vulcan, or gamemaster’s permission
You’ve undergone training in telepathic techniques
that allow the melding of minds through physical
contact. This always requires a task (normally Control
+ Sciences) with a Difficulty of at least 1, which can
be opposed by an unwilling participant. If successful,
you link minds with the participant, sharing thoughts
and memories. Momentum may be spent to gain more
information or perform deeper telepathic exchanges.
This link goes both ways, and it is a tiring and potentially
hazardous process. Complications can result in taking
Stress, pain, disorientation, or lingering emotional or
behavioral difficulties.
: . Nerve Pinch
(Vulcan Talent)
REQUIREMENTS: Vulcan, or gamemaster’s permission
You have learned numerous techniques for the stimula-
tion and control of nerve impulses—collectively called
neuropressure. Some applications of neuropressure can
be used to incapacitate assailants swiftly and non-le-
thally. The nerve pinch counts as a Melee Attack which
inflicts Stun Injuries with a Severity of 3 and the Intense
quality. You may use Science or Medicine instead of
Security when attempting a Nerve Pinch Attack.
AUGMENT AND CYBERNETIC TALENTS
THESE TALENTS ARE COMMON TO CHARACTERS
who have been genetically altered or who have been giv-
en artificial implants to overcome an injury or disability.
: . Augmented Ability
REQUIREMENT: Augment trait
Choose a single attribute when this talent is selected.
You gain the Extraordinary Attribute 1 special rule (page
350) for the chosen attribute, granting one automatic
success on all tasks using that attribute. When you use
this ability, increase the complication range by 2 for that
task. This talent may be selected multiple times, choos-
ing a different attribute each time.
: . Neural Interface
REQUIREMENT: Cyborg trait
You have a cybernetic device implanted directly into
your brain, allowing you to interface with computers
and similar technologies with their thoughts. Initiating
or breaking the link between your mind and a com-
puter system takes a minor action, and while you are
connected, you may reroll one d20 on any task using
that computer (including a ship’s Computer system).
However, if the computer (or the ship containing it) is
damaged, you immediately suffer a Deadly 4 Injury with
the Piercing quality.
: . Sensory Replacement
REQUIREMENT: Cyborg trait
: . Durability
REQUIREMENT: Augment or Cyborg trait
Whether through genetic engineering or cybernetic
implants, you’re more durable than most people. You
gain Protection 2.
You have a cybernetic device that replaces one of your
senses—most commonly sight or hearing. You gain the
Artificial Sense trait, which represents the ways that
your senses differ from those of other members of your
species. Further, when you attempt a task to locate some-
thing hidden or concealed, or to detect details not normal-
ly perceptible to that sense, you may re-roll a single d20.
ESOTERIC TALENTS
ESOTERIC TALENTS ARE UNUSUAL ABILITIES CHAR-
acters may occasionally possess. These abilities are
rare, and only available at the gamemaster’s discre-
tion, even for characters who are innately telepathic and
thus predisposed towards such mental powers.
Some character species (such as Aenar and Betazoids)
have Empathy or Telepathy as part of their Species
Ability. These function as the talents below, but the
character does not have to use a talent slot.
the Difficulty of this task if the situation is stressful, if
there are a lot of beings present, if the target has resist-
ance to telepathy, and other relevant factors.
: . Empathy
You can sense the emotions of most living beings
nearby, and can communicate telepathically with other
empaths and telepaths, as well as those with whom you
are extremely familiar. You cannot choose not to sense
the emotions of those nearby, except for those who are
resistant to telepathy. It may require effort and a task to
pick out the emotions of a specific individual in a crowd,
or to block out the emotions of those nearby. Increase
: . Extrasensory
Perception
You have an ability to perceive things beyond the normal
limits of humanoid senses, allowing you to gain knowl-
edge of people, places, and objects beyond your ability
to sense them conventionally. This is known as extra-
sensory perception, or ESP. It is not directly under your
control but instead tends to come in the form of accurate
guesses, strong feelings, or flashes of insight. Such sen-
sitivity often leaves you vulnerable to psychic dangers as
well. At any point during play, you may ask the gam-
emaster for hints or insights about the current situation,
and the gamemaster may similarly offer you information
about the current situation that you would not normally
be able to determine. Each hint adds 1 Threat, and you
may always refuse to accept the hints offered.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
155
: . Psychokinesis
You can manipulate and control objects using only the
power of the mind. You may exert a psychic force upon
an object within Close range equivalent to the force that
you would normally be able to exert physically, though
this takes concentration and cannot be done violently.
You may spend 1 Momentum (Immediate, Repeatable)
to increase the magnitude of the force you apply, with
each Momentum spent counting as an additional
person’s worth of force applied (that is, you can move or
manipulate objects that would take two people to move
or manipulate by spending 1 Momentum). Momentum
(Immediate) may also be spent to increase the range of
this: 1 Momentum to affect objects in Medium range, 2
Momentum to affect objects at Long range, and gam-
emaster’s discretion for distances beyond. To apply
force violently instead, add 1 Threat to make a Control +
Security task with a Difficulty of 2 to strike an opponent
(as a Ranged Attack), inflicting a Stun or Deadly Injury
with a Severity of 3.
: . Telepathic Projection
REQUIREMENT: Telepathy
Your telepathic ability is more potent than most, and
you are accustomed to projecting your thoughts into
COMMAND TALENTS
COMMAND TALENTS TYPICALLY RELATE TO CHARAC-
ters with a high Command rating.
: . Advanced
Team Dynamics
REQUIREMENTS: Command 4+, main character only,
commanding officer or executive officer only
The first time you introduce a supporting character in a
mission, that supporting character may take one addi-
tional option to improve the supporting character (from
the list on page 146).
: . Advisor
REQUIREMENT: Command 2+
Whenever you Assist another character using your
Command, the assisted character may re-roll one d20.
156
CHAPTER 4
other minds. You can send your thoughts into the
minds of other creatures—other than those immune
to telepathy—even if those creatures are not tele-
pathic themselves. You can ‘hear’ their responses by
reading their minds. You are also capable of using this
ability offensively, overwhelming a target’s mind with
pain-inducing psychic noise. This requires a Presence
+ Security task with a Difficulty of 2 (increasing by
1 for each range category beyond Close); success
inflicts a Stun or Deadly Injury with Severity 3 and the
Piercing effect.
: . Telepathy
You can sense the surface thoughts and emotions of
most living beings nearby, and can communicate tele-
pathically with other empaths and telepaths, as well as
those with whom you are extremely familiar. You cannot
choose not to sense the emotions or read the surface
thoughts of those nearby, except for those resistant to
telepathy. It requires effort and a task to pick out the
emotions or thoughts of a specific individual in a crowd,
to search a creature’s mind for specific thoughts or
memories, or to block out the minds of those nearby.
Increase the Difficulty if the situation is stressful, if there
are many beings present, if the target target is resistant
to telepathy, etc.
: . Bargain
REQUIREMENT: Command 3+
When you use Negotiation to make an offer to someone
during social conflict, you may re-roll a single d20 on
your next Persuade task to convince that person. If the
social conflict with that person involves an extended
task, your Impact is increased by 1.
: . Bolster
REQUIREMENT: Command 3+
When you succeed at any task using your Command
during an action scene, you may spend Momentum to
recover Stress suffered by your allies. When you spend 1
Momentum (Repeatable), one ally who can see and hear
you recovers 1 Stress. You may affect multiple allies, but
each ally affected may only recover 1 Stress in this way
each time this talent is used.
: . Call Out Targets
REQUIREMENTS: Command 3+ and Security 3+
When you Assist a character in an Attack, the assisted
character generates 2 bonus Momentum if their Attack
succeeds. Bonus Momentum cannot be saved.
: . Call to Action
REQUIREMENT: Command 3+
In a conflict, you may use the Prepare minor action to
grant one ally who you can communicate with a minor
action of their choice, which they perform immediately.
: . Cold Reading
REQUIREMENT: Command 4+
When you succeed at a task during social conflict, you
generate 1 bonus Momentum which must be used
for the Obtain Information Momentum spend to gain
knowledge about one of the people you’re interacting
with. If the social conflict with that person involves
an extended task, you may ignore any Resistance the
extended task has.
: . Coordinated Efforts
REQUIREMENT: Command 4+
When you Assist another character during an extended
task, the character you Assist increases their Impact by 1.
: . Decisive Leadership
REQUIREMENT: Command 4+
In a conflict, once per round, you or your allies may Keep
the Initiative for free.
: . Defuse the Tension
REQUIREMENT: Command 3+
Whenever you attempt a task to persuade someone not
to resort to violence, the first d20 you purchase for that
task is free.
: . Follow My Lead
REQUIREMENT: Command 3+
When you succeed at a task during combat or another
perilous situation, you may spend Determination. If you
do, choose a single ally who can hear you. The next
task that ally attempts counts as having assistance from
you, using your Presence + Command. On this task, do
not roll your assistance die: it counts as having already
rolled a 1.
: . Multi-Discipline
REQUIREMENTS: Command 3+, not the commanding
officer
You may select one additional Role Benefit, which may
not be Commanding Officer.
: . Plan of Action
REQUIREMENT: Command 4+
Whenever an ally succeeds at a task that was made
possible, or had a reduced Difficulty, because of a trait
you created, and that trait represented a plan, strategy,
or course of action, they generate 2 bonus Momentum.
Bonus Momentum cannot be saved.
: . Precautions
REQUIREMENT: Command 4+
Once per scene, when an ally suffers an Injury or the ship
suffers a Breach, prevent that Injury or Breach; describe
what precaution you took to prevent the issue.
: . Supervisor
REQUIREMENT: Main character
The ship’s Crew Support increases by 1. This increase is
cumulative if multiple main characters select it.
: . Teacher
REQUIREMENT: Command 3+
When you create a trait for an ally that represents your
guidance or advice, that ally may re-roll one d20 on a
single task they attempt which benefits from that trait.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
157
CONN TALENTS
CONN TALENTS TYPICALLY RELATE TO CHARACTERS
with a high Conn rating.
: . Attack Run
REQUIREMENT: Conn 4+
Whenever you take the Attack Pattern major action, ene-
my Attacks against you do not reduce in Difficulty due to
that action.
: . Covering Advance
REQUIREMENT: Conn 3+
When you succeed at a task to maneuver your ship,
you may spend 2 Momentum to provide cover for allied
ships. When an enemy vessel next makes an Attack,
before the beginning of your next turn, if you are the
closest ship to that attacker but they do not target you,
the difficulty of their Attack is equal to your ship’s Scale.
: . Efficient Evasion
REQUIREMENT: Conn 3+
When you attempt an Evasive Action major action for the
second or subsequent time in a row during a scene, you
add 1 Momentum to the group pool.
: . Fly-By
REQUIREMENT: Conn 2+
Whenever you use the Swift Action Momentum spend,
you do not increase the Difficulty of the second task if
one of the tasks you attempt is to pilot a vessel.
: . Glancing Impact
REQUIREMENT: Conn 4+
Whenever you succeed at the Evasive Action major ac-
tion, increase the Resistance of the ship you are piloting
by 2; this bonus lasts until the start of your next turn.
: . Hands-on Pilot
REQUIREMENTS: Conn 3+ and Engineering 3+
158
When you perform the Warp, Evasive Action, or Attack
Pattern major actions, the ship may count its focus range
as double the relevant department rating (i.e., if the ship
has a Conn of 3, it will score a critical success on any roll
of 6 or less). However, when anyone else pilots the ship,
increase the complication range by 1.
CHAPTER 4
: . Inertia
REQUIREMENT: Conn 3+
When you use the Impulse minor action, you may spend
1 Momentum to move one additional zone so long as
you used the Impulse minor action or Warp major action
in your previous turn.
: . Multi-tasking
REQUIREMENT: Conn 3+
When you attempt the Override major action while at a
bridge station that includes one or both helm or nav-
igator positions, you may use your Conn department
instead of the department usually required for that task.
: . Pathfinder
REQUIREMENT: Conn 4+
Whenever you attempt a task to plot a course through
unknown territory, reduce the Difficulty of the task by 1,
2, or 3, to a minimum of 1. For each point by which you
reduce the Difficulty, increase the complication range of
that task.
: . Precise Evasion
REQUIREMENT: Conn 4+
Whenever you use the Evasive Action major action, the
ship does not suffer the increased Difficulty for Attacks
normally caused by Evasive Action.
: . Precision Maneuvering
REQUIREMENT: Conn 4+
Whenever you attempt a task that requires precise or
careful maneuvering, or where there is a risk of colliding
with another object, you may re-roll 1d20.
: . Push the Limits
REQUIREMENT: Conn 4+
When you attempt a Conn task that has increased in
Difficulty due to environmental conditions or damage to
the engines, you may add 1 Threat to ignore the difficul-
ty increase.
: . Spacewalk
REQUIREMENT: Conn 3+
Whenever the Difficulty of a task would be increased
due to low- or zero-gravity, ignore that Difficulty increase.
If a task that was normally possible would be made
impossible because of low- or zero-gravity, you may
attempt the task at +1 Difficulty instead.
: . Thread the Needle
REQUIREMENT: Conn 4+
When you perform the Impulse minor action or Warp
major action when piloting a starship, enemy Attacks
from ships with a greater Scale than yours increase in
difficulty by +1. If attacked by a ship with a Scale that is
double or more the Scale of your ship, then you increase
the Difficulty by 2 instead.
: . Starship Expert
REQUIREMENT: Conn 3+
Whenever you take a Conn task to identify a type of
starship, or to try to understand an unknown form of
starship, you gain 1 bonus Momentum, which may only
be used on the Obtain Information Momentum spend,
or to pay part of the cost of the Create Trait Momentum
spend (where the trait must represent some form of
known or observed weakness in the ship being studied).
: . Strafing Run
REQUIREMENT: Conn 3+
Whenever you take the Attack Pattern task and then
Keep the Initiative, the cost to Keep the Initiative is
reduced to 0. If the character taking the next turn makes
an Attack, they may re-roll one d20.
: . Visit Every Star
REQUIREMENTS: Conn 3+ and Science 2+
You gain an additional focus, and one of your focuses
(either the one gained from this talent, or an existing
one) must relate to Astronavigation, Stellar Cartography,
or a similar field of space science. Further, when you
succeed at a navigation-related task, you gain 1 bonus
Momentum due to your knowledge and familiarity.
Bonus Momentum cannot be saved.
: . Zero-G Combat
REQUIREMENTS: Conn 3+ and Security 3+
In combat, when you make an Attack while in a zero-grav-
ity or micro-gravity environment, you may use the higher
of your Conn or Security departments for the task, and
you ignore any difficulty increases caused by the lack
of gravity. In addition, enemies who lack similar training
increase the Difficulty of Attacks against you by 1.
ENGINEERING TALENTS
ENGINEERING TALENTS TYPICALLY RELATE TO CHAR-
acters with a high Engineering rating.
: . I Know My Ship
REQUIREMENT: Engineering 4+
Whenever you attempt a task to determine the source of
a technical problem with your ship, the first bonus d20
you purchase is free.
: . I’m Giving It
All She’s Got!
REQUIREMENT: Engineering 4+
Once per scene, when the ship has no Reserve Power
remaining at the start of your turn, you may add 2 Threat
to gain Reserve Power.
: . In the Nick of Time
REQUIREMENT: Engineering 3+ or Science 3+
Whenever you succeed at an Engineering or Science task
as part of an extended task, you increase your Impact by 1.
: . Jury-Rig
REQUIREMENT: Engineering 4+
Whenever you attempt an Engineering task to per-
form repairs, you may reduce the Difficulty by 2, to a
minimum of 0. If you do this, however, then the repairs
are only temporary and will last only a single scene
before they fail again; you may increase this duration
by one scene by spending 1 Momentum (Repeatable).
Jury-rigged repairs can only be applied once, and the
Difficulty to repair a device that has been Jury-rigged
increases by 1.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
159
PAOLO PUGGIONI
: . Maintenance
Specialist
REQUIREMENT: Engineering 3+
You may ignore the first complication rolled on any
Engineering task. Further, when you create any equip-
ment trait, any character who uses that piece of equip-
ment in a task may ignore the first complication rolled.
: . Meticulous
REQUIREMENTS: Engineering 3+ and Control of 10+
During a timed challenge or extended task, before rolling,
you may take one die and treat it as if it had already rolled
a 1, but if you do, the task will take one additional interval.
: . Miracle Worker
REQUIREMENT: Engineering 5
Whenever you succeed at an Engineering task to over-
come an extended task, you may increase your Impact
by 1 by spending 1 Momentum instead of 2.
: . More Power!
REQUIREMENT: Engineering 3+
Whenever you use the Reroute Power major action, you
may spend 2 Momentum to give Reserve Power to two
systems, rather than one.
160
CHAPTER 4
: . Past the Redline
REQUIREMENTS: Engineering 4+ and Daring 9+
When you use advanced technology, including at-
tempting a task assisted by the ship, you may choose
to increase the complication range by 1, 2, or 3. If you
succeed, then you gain bonus Momentum equal to the
amount by which the complication range was increased.
Bonus Momentum cannot be saved.
: . Percussive
Maintenance
REQUIREMENT: Engineering 4+
When you attempt a Control + Engineering task, you
may add 1 Threat to use your Daring instead of your
Control. If you do this, and the task succeeds, then you
may reduce the time taken by 1 interval without spend-
ing Momentum.
: . Procedural
Compliance
REQUIREMENTS: Engineering 3+ and Conn 2+
When you attempt an Engineering task, you may remove
one d20 from your dice pool before rolling. If you do so,
you gain one automatic success on your task.
: . Repair Team Leader
REQUIREMENTS: Engineering 3+ and Command 2+
You are trained to direct and lead damage repair teams
during emergencies, giving them your guidance and
expert knowledge of the ship’s systems. If you succeed
at the Damage Control major action (page 303) you
may spend 2 Momentum (Repeatable) to repair one
additional Breach.
: . Right Tool for
the Right Job
REQUIREMENTS: Engineering 3+
Whenever you acquire an engineering tool with an
Opportunity Cost, that equipment trait of that tool gains
+1 Potency (typically this will result in Potency 2). If the
tool is used in an extended task, whoever is using that
tool increases their Impact by 1.
SECURITY TALENTS
SECURITY TALENTS TYPICALLY RELATE TO CHARAC-
ters with a high Security rating.
: . Ambush Tactics
REQUIREMENT: Security 3+
When you succeed at an Attack against an enemy who
is unaware of your presence, or who is suffering from
a trait or complication which represents a weakness or
vulnerability, increase the Severity of the Attack by 2.
: . Applied Force
REQUIREMENT: Security 4+, Fitness 9+
When you make a Melee Attack, you may use Fitness
instead of Daring. In addition, you add 1 to the Severity
of your Unarmed Attacks.
: . Close Protection
REQUIREMENT: Security 4+
When you make a successful Attack, you may spend 1
Momentum to protect a single ally within Close range.
The next Attack against that ally before the start of your
next turn increases in Difficulty by 1.
: . Saboteur
REQUIREMENT: Engineering 3+
When you make an Attack against a structure, machine,
or stationary vehicle while in personal combat (i.e., you
aren’t using a ship’s weapons to make the Attack), you
may use your Engineering instead of your Security to
resolve the Attack.
: . Transporter Chief
REQUIREMENT: Engineering 3+
You’re well-versed in the operation of transporter
systems and can often get them to function in extreme
circumstances or to achieve outcomes that few could
manage. Such efforts are never without risk, given the
delicacy of the technology. When you attempt a task
to use, repair, or modify a transporter, you may add
2 Threat to reduce the Difficulty of the task by 2, to a
minimum of 0.
: . Crisis Management
REQUIREMENT: Security 3+ or Command 3+
The Momentum cost to use the Direct major action
(page 289) is removed.
: . Defensive Training
REQUIREMENT: Security 2+
Select either Melee Attacks or Ranged Attacks when you
acquire this talent. Attacks against you of the chosen
type increase in Difficulty by 1.
: . Fire at Will
REQUIREMENT: Security 3+
If you make an Attack, you may use the Swift Action
Momentum spend for 1 Momentum rather than 2, but
the second major action you take must also be an Attack.
: . Get Down!
REQUIREMENT: Security 2+
You and any allies within Close range gain +1 Protection
while in Cover.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
161
: . Interrogation
REQUIREMENT: Security 3+
When you succeed at a task to coerce someone to
reveal information in a social conflict, you may ask
one question for free, as per the Obtain Information
Momentum spend.
: . Lead Investigator
REQUIREMENT: Security 3+ or Conn 3+
Whenever you attempt a task to retrieve or analyze evi-
dence of a crime, you may re-roll 1d20. When you spend
one or more Momentum to Obtain Information to ask
questions about a crime scene or evidence, you may ask
one additional question.
: . Martial Artist
REQUIREMENT: Security 4+
Your Unarmed Strike Attack may be used to inflict
Deadly Injuries as well as Stun Injuries.
: . Mean Right Hook
REQUIREMENT: Security 4+
Your Unarmed Strike Attack gains the Intense quality.
: . Pack Tactics
REQUIREMENT: Security 4+
Whenever you Assist another character during combat,
the character you assisted gains 1 bonus Momentum if
they succeed.
SCIENCE TALENTS
SCIENCE TALENTS TYPICALLY RELATE TO CHARAC-
ters with a high Science rating.
: . Applied Research
REQUIREMENT: Science 3+
Once per scene, when you attempt a task which relates
to information you received earlier that scene from an
Obtain Information question, the first bonus die you
purchase is free.
162
CHAPTER 4
: . Piercing Salvo
REQUIREMENT: Security 4+
When you make a Torpedo Attack, you may spend 2
Momentum (Immediate) to add the Piercing quality.
: . Precision Targeting
REQUIREMENTS: Security 3+ and Conn 3+
You can more easily pick out and target specific systems
when making an Attack against an enemy vessel. When
you make an Attack with starship weapons that targets a
specific ship system, you may re-roll a d20.
: . Quick to Action
REQUIREMENT: Security 3+
During the first round of any combat, you and your allies
may ignore the normal cost to Keep the Initiative.
: . Steady Hands
REQUIREMENTS: Security 3+ and Control 9+
When you take the Aim minor action (page 288) before
a Ranged Attack, you add 1 to the Attack’s Severity, in
addition to the other effects of aiming.
: . Baffling Briefing
REQUIREMENTS: Science 3+ and Presence 9+
When you engage in a social conflict using deception, you
may use Science in place of Command so long as their
technical knowledge is used to mislead their opponent.
: . Computer Expertise
REQUIREMENT: Science 2+
Whenever you attempt a task that involves the program-
ming or study of a computer system, the first bonus d20
you purchase is free.
: . Dedicated Focus (X)
REQUIREMENT: Science 4+
When this talent is taken, choose one of your focuses.
When attempting a task where that focus applies, you
score a critical success for any die which rolls equal to
or under twice the relevant department.
: . Did the Reading
REQUIREMENT: Science 4+
When you attempt a task, you may spend 1 Momentum
(Immediate) to use Science on that task instead of
the department you would normally use. In addition,
you count as having an applicable focus for that task.
Each time after the first in a single scene that you use
this ability, the Momentum cost increases by 1: this is
cumulative.
: . Expedition Expert
REQUIREMENTS: Science 3+ and Fitness 9+
Prior to participating in an away team mission, you may
make additional preparations by spending 2 Momentum
(Immediate). During the expedition, any member of the
away team may re-roll a single d20 on any task to navi-
gate the terrain or circumvent a hazard or obstacle. The
away team may re-roll a total number of dice in this way
equal to your Science rating.
: . Intense Scrutiny
REQUIREMENT: Engineering 3+ or Science 3+
Whenever you succeed at a task using Reason or
Control as part of an extended task, you ignore any
Resistance on that extended task.
: . Lab Rat
REQUIREMENTS: Science 3+ and Engineering 3+
When attempting an extended task while using a labora-
tory, increase your Impact by 1.
: . Learn from Failure
REQUIREMENT: Science 4+
When you fail at a Science task, you may add 3 Threat
to create a trait which represents knowledge or insights
gained from the failure. The cost of this is reduced by 1
for each success you scored on the failed task.
: . Mental Repository
REQUIREMENTS: Science 3+ and Reason 10+
Using extensive mental conditioning, you have access to
memories with unprecedented clarity and accuracy. You
may treat Obtain Information as if it were an Immediate
Momentum spend, but the answers to these questions
can only come from information you would already know
and remember.
: . Rapid Analysis
REQUIREMENTS: Science 3+ and Daring 9+
When you succeed at a Science task, the cost of the
Reduce Time Momentum option is reduced to 1.
: . Rapid Hypothesis
REQUIREMENT: Science 5
Once per scene, when you ask two or more questions
using Obtain Information, you may immediately create a
trait representing your theoretical understanding of the
subject of those questions.
: . Student of War
REQUIREMENTS: Science 4+ and Security 3+
You have conducted extensive research into numer-
ous kinds of conflict and has devoted your academic
career to the study of war. While this knowledge may be
purely theoretical, such information, when placed into
the hands of more capable combatants, can be truly
devastating. When you Assist a character making an
Attack or taking the Guard action in combat, they may
re-roll one d20.
: . Testing a Theory
REQUIREMENT: Science 2+
When you attempt a task using Engineering or Science,
the first bonus d20 you purchase is free, so long as you
succeeded at a previous task covering the same scientif-
ic or technological field earlier in the same adventure. If
you created a trait that represents a hypothesis about an
unknown phenomenon, you may also re-roll one d20 on
tasks related to that hypothesis.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
163
: . Theory into Practice
REQUIREMENTS: Science 3+ and Testing a Theory
talent
When you succeed at a task using Engineering or
Science where you gain the additional d20 from the
Testing a Theory talent, or which benefits from a
trait that represents a hypothesis you’ve made, you
generate 2 bonus Momentum. Bonus Momentum may
not be saved.
MEDICINE TALENTS
MEDICINE TALENTS TYPICALLY RELATE TO CHARAC-
ters with a high Medicine rating.
: . Bedside Manner
REQUIREMENTS: Command 3+ and Medicine 3+
When you succeed at a Medicine task to heal an Injury,
you may immediately remove a trait from the patient,
even if that trait was unrelated to the Injury being treat-
ed. In addition, when you attempt a Reputation Check,
add one additional positive influence.
: . Chief of Staff
REQUIREMENTS: Medicine 3+ and Command 3+
When you Assist another character attempting a
Medicine task, each assisting character may re-roll their
assistance die.
: . Combat Medic
REQUIREMENTS: Medicine 3+ and Security 2+
When attempting a Medicine task during combat, you
may pick one trait which increases the Difficulty of the
task and ignore it.
: . Cutting Edge Medicine
REQUIREMENT: Medicine 4+
Whenever you attempt a Medicine task with a Difficulty
of 3 or higher, you may spend up to 3 Momentum
(Immediate) to reduce the Difficulty by the number of
Momentum spent, to a minimum Difficulty of 1. However,
as these latest advances are often experimental, the
complication range of the task increases by 1 for each
Momentum spent.
164
CHAPTER 4
: . Walking Encyclopedia
REQUIREMENTS: Science 2+ and Reason 9+
Once per session, when you attempt a task, you may
spend 2 Momentum (Immediate) to gain an addition-
al focus for the remainder of the session, due to your
breadth of knowledge. However, any task using that
focus increases its complication range by 1, as you are
not a true expert on that subject.
: . Cyberneticist
REQUIREMENTS: Engineering 3+ and Medicine 3+
When you attempt a task to work on, install, or remove a
cybernetic device from a patient, the first bonus d20 you
purchase is free.
: . Diagnostic Expertise
REQUIREMENT: Medicine 4+
When you succeed at a Medicine task to identify and
diagnose the nature of a medical problem, you may ask
one question—as per Obtain Information—for every
additional d20 you bought by spending Momentum.
: . Doctor’s Orders
REQUIREMENT: Medicine 4+
When you attempt a task to coordinate others, or to
coerce someone into taking or refraining from a specific
course of action, you may use your Medicine depart-
ment instead of Command.
: . Don’t You Die on Me!
REQUIREMENT: Medicine 5
When a character is killed, you may spend
Determination to make one attempt to revive them. If
they were killed instantly by an Attack, then this may
only be attempted within that scene. If the character
suffered an Injury and died because they didn’t receive
medical treatment in time, this may be attempted
before the end of the subsequent scene. This requires
a Daring + Medicine task, with a Difficulty of 3. If suc-
cessful, the character is brought back from the brink of
death, though they will remain Defeated for the remain-
der of the adventure. Failure means that your efforts
were unsuccessful and the character dies.
: . Fellowship Specialty
REQUIREMENT: Medicine 4+
Select a focus. When you succeed at a Medicine task
where that focus applies, the cost of the Create Trait
Momentum spend is reduced to 1.
: . Field Medicine
When attempting a Medicine task, you may ignore any
increase in Difficulty or complication range for working
without the proper tools or equipment.
: . First Response
REQUIREMENT: Medicine 3+
When you attempt the First Aid task during combat, the
first die you purchase is free. Further, you may always
Succeed at Cost, with each complication you suffer
adding 1 to the Difficulty of healing the patient’s Injury
subsequently.
: . Insightful Guidance
REQUIREMENTS: Command 2+ and Medicine 3+
Whenever you Assist a character in a social conflict,
using your knowledge of psychology or emotional states,
that character is considered to have a beneficial trait
(Psychological Profile) in addition to the normal benefits
provided by your Assist.
: . Positive Reinforcement
REQUIREMENTS: Ship’s Counselor role, Medicine 3+,
and Presence 9+
Once per mission, you may attempt a Presence +
Medicine task with a Difficulty of 3, while providing emo-
tional or mental treatment for another character. Success
creates a character trait for your patient that lasts until
the end of the mission: Boosted Confidence. In addition
to the normal effects of the trait, that character can reroll
their dice pool, as if they’d spent Determination, once be-
fore the end of the mission. If the task the character used
their reroll on fails, they lose the trait created by this talent.
: . Practice Makes
Perfect
REQUIREMENTS: Medicine 3+ and Reason 8+
After you have succeeded in a Medicine task, the
Difficulty of any other Medicine tasks attempted that
scene to treat or heal the same kind of Injury, poison,
disease, or other ailment is reduced by 1.
: . Psychoanalyst
REQUIREMENTS: Medicine 3+ and a psychology-relat-
ed focus
When you use Medicine during a social conflict, you
may increase the complication range of your task by 1, 2,
or 3. For each step of complication range increased, you
may ask a single question as if you’d spent Momentum
on Obtain Information. Any Complications generated
from this task results in the individual you are interacting
with becoming offended or upset with being “analyzed.”
: . Quick Study
REQUIREMENT: Science 3+ or Medicine 3+
When attempting a task that will involve an unfamiliar
practice, technique, or medical procedure, or which is to
treat an unfamiliar species, ignore any Difficulty or compli-
cation range increase stemming from your unfamiliarity.
: . Stimulant Shot
REQUIREMENT: Medicine 3+
When you perform the First Aid task to revive a Defeated
ally, you may add 1 Threat to let that ally recover Stress
equal to your Medicine rating. A character may only bene-
fit from this talent once per adventure.
: . Surgery Savant
REQUIREMENT: Medicine 4+
When attempting a Medicine task during an extended
task relating to surgery, your Impact is increased by 1.
Impact is explained in more detail on page 271.
: . Triage
REQUIREMENT: Medicine 3+
When you attempt a task to identify specific Injuries
or illnesses, or to determine the severity of a patient’s
condition, you may spend 1 Momentum (Repeatable) to
diagnose one additional patient..
REPORTING FOR DUTy
165
: . CHAPTER 4.6
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT COMES
in two forms: characters develop periodi-
cally during their careers in events called
milestones. In addition, the character’s
reputation changes as they pursue their
goals and seek to better themselves.
“I know I’ve got something to offer.
I just need a chance to prove it.
- Nog
character or the posting itself—this
represents the main character working
to improve the crew and their post.
Changes made to supporting charac-
ters and to the post must be discussed
with the entire group: they belong to
everyone, so everyone should have a
say. Similarly, only main characters track
their Reputation: a supporting character
isn’t important enough.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
DOCTOR VORAAL
Change is the one
constant in the universe.
People change every
day; sometimes in small
ways, other times in
significant or epic ways.
Your main character
is no different. As
they seek out new life
and new civilizations,
they are changed
by their choices and
the consequences
of their actions, and
by what they learn.
The adversity your
character overcomes,
and the challenges they
confront, shape them
into someone new.
In addition, the
successes and
failures your character
experiences shape how
others regard them.
Read on to learn more
about how to develop
your main character’s
abilities and reputation
over the course of your
adventures
Only main characters can receive mile-
stones, but the benefit of a milestone
can be used to change a supporting
Milestones
A MILESTONE IS A MEANINGFUL
event in your character’s life, a point at
which they re-examine themselves and
changes in response to what they’ve
experienced. Milestones occur at the
end of missions, though your character
will not always have a milestone at the
end of every mission.
Milestones are connected to a charac-
ter’s values, and to the Directives present
during missions. Values are what drive
a character’s actions, and a milestone is
a significant point reached because of
those actions. Milestones also vary in sig-
nificance, with greater impact the more a
character is involved in the action.
: . Log Entries
To reach milestones and have your char-
acter grow, you should maintain a per-
sonal log. The log is a record of your main
character’s adventures, and serves as an
accounting of the character’s history in
play. You gain milestones whenever you
make a connection between the current
adventure, and one noted in your log.
At the end of each adventure, create
a brief description of the mission
itself and how your main character
was involved. This doesn’t need to be
a detailed account of the adventure,
as it’s mainly there as a reminder of
past actions, so one or two sentences
should be the most you need; if your
gamemaster provides titles for each
adventure, noting down the title of the
adventure is sufficient. You’re welcome
to write more if you want—and some
players may want to—but it’s not essen-
tial, and so long as you have a useful
reminder of past exploits, any amount is
fine. A blank personal log is provided on
page 373.
Note which (if any) of your values you
used positively, used negatively, or
challenged. Some shorthand is useful
here: by numbering your values, you can
refer to them by simply writing V1, V2,
V3, etc., (or D1, D2, etc., for Directives),
and following any that were used with a
+ (used positively), a – (used negatively),
or a ! (challenged).
166
CHAPTER 4
In addition, if you challenged a value, you may rewrite
that value. The new value should relate somehow to
what it was before, and how the character’s views have
changed because of the situation that caused the chal-
lenge. It doesn’t have to be a big difference—and often,
it won’t be—but the new value should demonstrate how
the character’s perspectives have shifted. If you choose
not to rewrite the value, it remains crossed out until you
rewrite it.
Finally, if you used any of your values (positively, nega-
tively, or challenged) during that adventure, you may also
make an adjustment to your character. This is optional,
but it allows characters to adjust and shift in small ways
over time, letting you tweak things that aren’t working as
intended, or represent how your character adjusts their
priorities over time. You may do one of the following:
§ ATTRIBUTES: Reduce one attribute by 1 and increase
another attribute by 1. You may not increase an attrib-
ute to above 11, nor may you reduce an attribute to
below 7.
§ DEPARTMENTS: Reduce one department by 1
and increase another by 1. You can’t increase any
department to more than 4 in this way, nor reduce a
department below 1.
§ FOCUSES: Choose one of your focuses and replace it
with a different focus.
§ TALENTS: Replace one of your talents with a different
one for which you meet the prerequisites.
§ SUPPORTING CHARACTER: Help a supporting
character in their training: adjust one of the sup-
porting character’s attributes or departments, swap
one of their focuses, or swap one of their talents, as
described above.
: . Reaching a Milestone
Once during any adventure, when you choose to use one
of your main character’s values, you may call back to any
previous adventure in your log where you used the same
value (or, in the case of values that were challenged
and rewritten, to the new value created that adventure).
Describe how that previous experience influences what
is happening now, and then gain Determination (you’re
still limited to the normal maximum of 3). Place a tick
next to the log entry you called back to, or otherwise
mark that you have used it: each log entry may only be
used once.
The gamemaster may veto a call back which seems ten-
uous or inappropriate to the situation, though this should
be done rarely, and if a call back is vetoed, then you may
attempt another call back later in that adventure.
At the end of the adventure, when adding to your log,
you receive a milestone. Note or mark in the log entry
for the current adventure that you have received a mile-
stone, and which previous adventure you called back to
(this will be important later).
Once you’ve written the log entry, you may make a
change to your character. The change can be any one of
the following:
§ ATTRIBUTES: Choose a single attribute and increase
it by 1. You may not increase an attribute above 11,
and you may only increase each attribute once using
a milestone.
§ DEPARTMENTS: Choose a single department and
increase it by 1. You may not increase a department
above 4, and you may only increase each department
once using a milestone.
§ FOCUS: Gain one additional focus.
§ TALENT: Gain one additional talent.
§ SUPPORTING CHARACTER: Help a supporting char-
acter in their training: increase one of the supporting
character’s attributes or departments, or give them
one extra focus or talent. A supporting character may
not have more than six focuses or four talents.
§ SHIP SYSTEMS: Adjust one of the ship’s systems.
Reduce one system by 1 and increase another system
by 1. You may not increase a system to above 11, nor
reduce a system to below 6.
§ SHIP DEPARTMENTS: Reduce one department by
1 and increase another by 1. You can’t increase any
department to more than 4 in this way, nor can you
reduce a department below 1.
§ SHIP TALENTS: Swap one of the ship’s talents, with
the ship removing some specialized systems to make
way for others. Choose one of the ship’s talents and
replace it with a new one.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
167
: . Character Arcs
Each milestone is built on calling back to prior experi-
ences and being influenced by them. Character arcs
are the next step of that, showing how a character has
developed over a longer stretch of time and several
important events.
 Player-Facing
Advancement
This system of milestones is designed so a main char-
acter’s advancement is driven by the player, rather than
something which happens passively in the background
or at the gamemaster’s discretion. All the decisions
made when adding a log entry, reaching a milestone, or
completing a character arc are made by you, the player,
and they all stem from the decision to use a value.
When you make a call back to a previous adventure, you
may gain an additional benefit if that previous adventure
was a milestone, creating a character arc. You can only
get this additional benefit a few times, as they represent
momentous and significant events in the character’s life,
and moments like that don’t come along very often.
As you begin each session with 1 Determination, you
always have the potential to use at least one value or
Directive in every mission, so there should always be at
least a little potential for growth if the character plays an
active part in the mission.
Each character arc is a string of adventures connected by
a single value. At a minimum, this will be three adven-
tures: an initial one where you used that value, a mile-
stone where you called back to that initial adventure, and
the third one which calls back to that milestone. However,
each time you complete a character arc, it takes more
time and effort to complete the next character arc.
The gamemaster can help you along by creating and
suggesting opportunities where a value might be useful,
but ultimately, the power to guide your character’s
growth rests in the hands of one person: you.
ALEXEY CHERNIK
168
CHAPTER 4
ARTIST
NAME
When you complete a character arc, you may change
your character using one of the options below instead of
one of the normal milestone options.
§ ATTRIBUTES: Choose a single attribute and increase
it by 1. You may not increase an attribute above 12.
§ DEPARTMENTS: Choose a single department and
increase it by 1. You may not increase a department
above 5.
§ VALUE: You may create one additional value for the
character.
§ SHIP’S SYSTEMS: Choose one of the ship’s sys-
tems and increase it by 1. Each system may only be
increased by 1 by any character using a milestone.
REPUTATION
A PERSON’S REPUTATION IS VITAL. IN CULTURES
which have grown beyond material acquisition and
scarcity, reputation is almost a currency, while in
cultures that still prize material wealth, reputation is
often pivotal in attaining more wealth. It shapes how a
person’s peers and superiors regard them, and in turn
influences the kinds of opportunities and considera-
tions they receive.
In Starfleet and similar organizations, a certain standard
of behavior is expected of officers and crew alike, and
those standards increase with rank and responsibility.
A main character has a Reputation rating, which is an
approximate measure of how their peers and superiors
regard them. This is not merely a passive indicator: it
can serve as a limited defense against the accusations
and challenges of others and allow the character greater
leeway and freedom to act.
A main character begins play with a Reputation
rating of 3.
: . Definition
Under normal circumstances, a character’s Reputation
serves as a basic guide for how well-regarded they are
among others within their species or organization. It
should serve as a guideline for how others—outside the
character’s ship and crew—view the character, based
on mission reports, official records, rumor, and hearsay.
It’s unlikely to influence people the character knows
personally, as they’ll have formed their own opinions,
§ SHIP’S DEPARTMENTS: Choose one of the ship’s
departments, and increase it by 1, to a maximum of
5. Each department may only be increased by 1 in
this way.
§ SHIP’S TALENTS: Select one additional talent for the
ship, which may ignore the normal maximum number
of talents a ship may possess.
Further, the total number of missions required to make
up a character arc increases by 1 for each character arc
you’ve already completed: so, while the first character
arc you complete is made up of three missions, the
second must include four, the third must include five,
and so forth.
but it will influence the views of those who haven’t yet
met the character, as well as influencing the most formal
interactions.
When you attempt a task to convince, persuade, or
otherwise interact with someone who knows you by
reputation alone, you may use your Reputation instead
of a department rating to create your target number,
as you allow your deeds and renown to speak for you.
Obviously, you cannot do this if you are disguised or
attempting to pretend to be someone else.
: . Effects
Naturally, Reputation is not fixed; it changes as you
face new challenges and the consequences of your
decisions. Actions in keeping with the traditions and
values of the Federation (or whatever culture your game
centers on) may increase your Reputation, while choices
and outcomes which reflect poorly upon your ship and
your culture may reduce your Reputation and may even
create other consequences.
Further, a character’s reputation can be a source of
benefits or problems during play. This is all resolved at
the end of a mission.
At the end of a mission, the gamemaster should consider
the outcome of the mission, the decisions that were tak-
en, and decide which factors may influence a character’s
Reputation. The gamemaster is the final arbiter of wheth-
er an action has a positive or negative influence upon a
character’s Reputation, but the simplest method is a list
REPORTING FOR DUTy
169
: . Reputation
REPUTATION INFLUENCE (STARFLEET OR SIMILAR) 0
1
2
3
4
5
You are barely fit to be called a Starfleet officer,
and you have few, if any, chances left to redeem
yourself and salvage your career. Further
problems may see you discharged from the
service or worse.
Your record is poor, and your future in Starfleet
is questionable. You are viewed as dangerously
prone to disobedience, insubordination, and
needless recklessness. Further problems may
result in significant disciplinary action.
Your record is somewhat uncertain, and
your performance is questionable. You
are viewed as being too quick to disregard
Starfleet’s rules and regulations, occasionally
insubordinate, or you have gained a reputation
for unnecessary recklessness.
Your record is solid, and your performance is
satisfactory. This is the default state for a new
character’s Reputation.
You have a fine record, including a few
commendations for exceptional performance.
You are viewed as a good and dutiful officer or
crewperson, and your expertise and perspectives
are worthy of consideration.
You have an exemplary record, including numerous
commendations and decorations for acting above
and beyond the call of duty. You are the finest that
Starfleet has to offer, and you are given greater
discretion in how you carry out their duties.
INFLUENCE (CIVILIAN)
You are held in low regard by almost everyone
who has ever heard of you. You’re seen as
untrustworthy, feckless, or worse. People would
generally prefer if you moved on quickly.
You have a bad reputation, with a known habit
of breaking the rules, ignoring instructions,
and betraying the trust of those who’ve
worked with you.
Your reputation is somewhat sketchy, and
many people you encounter are at least a little
dubious of what they’ve heard about you. You
may have done some unsavory or illicit things in
your past.
You have an unremarkable, but solid reputation.
You’re unexceptional, yet few if any have anything
bad to say about you either.
You have a good reputation, and you’re known for
being diligent, capable, and trustworthy.
You’re thought of highly among those in your
field, and your peers value your insights and
recommendations.
 Adapting Reputation
The positive and negative influences in this section are
largely focused on a Starfleet-style game, where the
characters are Starfleet personnel and/or citizens of the
Federation. However, these Reputation rules can be ad-
justed to suit a variety of cultures by changing the name
of the rating (to “Glory,” perhaps) and adjusting the list of
questions asked of characters with each mission.
of simple yes-or-no questions. The gamemaster may add
questions as they see fit, and published missions may
include additional questions specific to that mission. This
should still be done even for a character who was slain
during the mission, as the dead rely on their reputation
and honor just as much as the living do.
There are more potential negative influences than there
are positive influences, as they are meant to represent
a standard that individuals must strive to uphold. It
should, at times, be a struggle to uphold the principles of
Starfleet and the Federation, and it is a test of character
to retain one’s principles even in difficult times.
170
CHAPTER 4
POSITIVE INFLUENCES
Answering yes to the following questions are considered
positive influences:
§ Was your mission successful?
§ Did you positively use one or more of the mission’s
Directives?
§ Did you obey the orders given to you by your
superiors?
§ Did you prevent combat from occurring, or avoid
escalating hostilities?
§ Did you establish common ground or peaceful coop-
eration with those who were newly encountered or
who were previously hostile to you?
§ Did you directly contribute to saving the lives of inno-
cent people or your fellow crew?
§ Did you take all reasonable action to render aid to
those in urgent need or distress?
: . The Reputation Roll
Once the questions have been asked, and any positive
and negative influences have been counted out, make a
Reputation roll.
1. Determine Target Number: Your target number for
this roll is equal to 7 plus your Reputation.
2. Set Difficulty: The Difficulty of this roll is equal to the
number of negative influences you have.
3. Assemble Dice Pool: Roll a number of d20s equal to
the number of positive influences you have. Unlike a
normal task, there is no maximum number of d20s for
this roll.
4. Check for Successes: Each d20 which rolls equal to
or less than your target number generates 1 success.
§ Any d20 which rolls equal to or less than your
Reputation rating will generate 2 successes instead.
§ Any 20 rolled is a complication, which may generate
Reprimands if you fail the Reputation roll. If you’ve
already got Reprimands left over from prior adven-
tures, then your chance of a complication is higher.
NEGATIVE INFLUENCES
Answering yes to the following questions is considered
a negative influence on the character’s Reputation:
§ Was your mission a failure?
§ Did you challenge one of the mission’s Directives?
§ Were you disobedient to your superiors?
§ Were personnel under your command killed during
the mission?
§ Did you employ force to any ends other than the
defense of self, ship, crew, or innocent life?
§ Did you employ lethal force during the mission?
§ Did you take any unnecessary risks during the
mission?
§ Did you cause, or allow through inaction, innocent
lives to be lost during the mission?
§ Did you lie, cheat, threaten, or coerce others to
achieve objectives during the mission?
§ Did you permit a colleague or subordinate to act
unethically or illegally during the performance of
their duties?
5. Compare to Difficulty: If the number of successes
you scored is equal to or higher than the Difficulty,
then you’ve acted properly. If the number of success-
es you scored is less than the Difficulty, then you will
be reprimanded.
§ Each success scored above the Difficulty becomes
a point of Acclaim, which you may spend on vari-
ous benefits.
§ If you’re dishonorable, then you suffer 1 Reprimand
for each success you scored less than the number
needed, plus one extra Reprimand for each die
that rolled a 20.
6. Outcome: Spend any Acclaim you’ve gained, or any
Reprimand you’ve suffered.
When making Reputation rolls, it is best to have the
commanding officer make their roll first, as the results of
their roll may impact the rolls of other characters.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
171
: . Reprimand Chance
REPRIMAND
TOTAL
CHANCE OF SUFFERING A
REPRIMAND
0 20
1 19–20
2 18–20
3 17–20
4 16–20
5+ 15–20
 Not a Normal Task
A Reputation roll resembles a task in several ways: you
have a target number and a Difficulty, you roll several
d20s, and you count successes to try to match that
Difficulty. However, strictly speaking, it isn’t a task.
Tasks have a few constraints and constants to them,
such as the minimum and maximum number of dice
rolled, or the Difficulty tending to be 5 or less, which do
not apply to Reputation rolls. This is a roll specifically
representing the various actions a character has taken,
and to that end, it can differ from a normal task by allow-
ing a higher Difficulty than a task would normally have,
or by letting the player roll fewer than 2d20 or more than
5d20 if the circumstances suit it.
: . Using Acclaim
You gain Acclaim when you are deemed to have acted
properly, honestly, and in good faith, and it is a powerful
tool to help further your character’s career and achieve
their ambitions. Acclaim must be spent immediately—
nobody can coast on past successes—but it can be
spent as you see fit using any of the options presented
in this section. You may use any of the options below as
many times as you wish.
§ AWARDS: Acclaim may be used to purchase awards,
which provide limited, but potent benefits to those
who achieve them. Each award has a different cost
and may have additional requirements. A selection of
Starfleet awards is presented below, and gamemas-
ters are encouraged to devise their own.
172
CHAPTER 4
§ COMMEND ANOTHER: If you are the commanding
officer, you may spend 1 Acclaim to commend anoth-
er main character in the group. This counts as one
extra positive influence on the character’s reputation
roll, and it must be done before that character rolls.
§ ELEVATION: A character who is a non-commis-
sioned officer may receive a battlefield commission
and become an officer, by spending 3 Acclaim. If the
commanding officer refuses, no Acclaim is spent. The
gamemaster chooses the new officer’s initial rank.
§ GAIN FAVOR: With renown comes the attention of
others. You may spend Acclaim to obtain a favor from
an NPC you encountered during the adventure (who
cannot be an enemy). This costs 1 Acclaim normally,
but the cost increases by 1 if the NPC is not from
Starfleet, by 1 if the NPC commands a starship (or
has similar status), or 2 if the NPC is an admiral, gen-
eral, ambassador, or other high-ranking figure. These
increases in cost can be combined: getting a favor
from a foreign ambassador costs 4 Acclaim, while a
favor from the chief operations officer on a Federation
starbase only costs 1.
§ INCREASE REPUTATION: You may increase your
Reputation by 1, by spending Acclaim equal to the
Reputation you are increasing to (that is, increasing
Reputation from 3 to 4 costs 4 Acclaim). You may only
use this at most once per adventure.
§ PROMOTION: A character may be promoted to
a higher rank, by spending 3 Acclaim. If the com-
manding officer refuses, no Acclaim is spent. A
commander may not promote anyone to command-
er or above, and a captain may not promote anyone
to captain or above.
§ STATUS: With the gamemaster’s assistance, create
an additional trait for the character, which reflects
their achievements, recognition, or special status, or
remove a trait which represents something negative
or detrimental to the character. If the character is a
commanding officer, then they may add a trait to their
ship instead. This costs 3 Acclaim.
AWARDS
AWARDS ARE ISSUED IN RECOGNITION OF HONOR-
able and distinguished achievements, often during
ceremonies before an audience of their peers, friends,
and family. These awards are accompanied by a medal
or other decoration and may mean induction into a
ceremonial organization. The physical medal or deco-
ration is seldom worn on a duty uniform but is worn on
dress uniforms.
Each award has a listed cost in Acclaim, and a condi-
tion which must have been met during the mission(s)
relevant for the award: if the condition was not met, the
character cannot purchase the award.
: . Christopher Pike
Medal of Valor
A prestigious medal awarded to Starfleet officers in
recognition of remarkable leadership, meritorious con-
duct, and acts of personal bravery, named for legendary
Starfleet officer Christopher Pike. Prior to the 2260s,
similar medals existed under different names.
§ COST: 4
§ CONDITIONS: The character must be an officer in a
command or leadership position who led their crew
in a succession of several difficult missions, and
who faced personal danger on at least two of those
missions.
§ BENEFIT: Once per mission, when the character
uses the Direct task, they may treat their d20 as if it
had rolled a 1.
: . Cochrane Medal
of Excellence
The Cochrane Medal of Excellence is awarded by the
Zefram Cochrane Institute for Advanced Theoretical
Physics to Starfleet officers and cadets who perform
outstanding feats in various fields of science and
engineering.
§ COST: 3
§ CONDITIONS: The character must have significantly
contributed to a field of scientific study or engineering,
such as making and documenting an important discov-
ery, or finding a solution to a long-standing problem.
§ BENEFIT: Select a single focus the character
possesses, which must relate to the scientific or
engineering field they earned the medal for. Once
per mission, when the character spends a point of
Determination on a task involving that focus, the
character may select two benefits of spending a point
of Determination instead of one.
: . Grankite Order
of Tactics
The Grankite Order of Tactics is awarded to new mem-
bers of the Grankite Order, a ceremonial order within
Starfleet recognizing officers who demonstrate excep-
tional tactical acumen.
§ COST: 3
§ CONDITIONS: The character must have demon-
strated exceptional skill and tactical thinking during
combat or some other crisis, which directly contribut-
ed to the success of the mission or the survival of the
ship and crew.
§ BENEFIT: Once per mission, when the character
creates a trait that reflects or represents some strat-
egy or tactic, they may automatically add a level of
Potency to that trait.
: . Karagite Order
of Heroism
The Karagite Order of Heroism is awarded to new
members of the Karagite Order, a ceremonial order
within Starfleet recognizing officers who demonstrate
exceptional heroism in defense of the Federation and
its people.
§ COST: 3
§ CONDITIONS: The character must have personally
faced extreme danger and overwhelming odds in
combat or a similar crisis, and both survived and suc-
ceeded in defending a Federation world or outpost
from loss or destruction.
§ BENEFIT: Once per mission, when the character
would suffer an Injury, the character may Avoid
the Injury for free. Alternatively, once per mission,
when the character’s ship would suffer one or more
breaches, the character may spend 2 Momentum
(Immediate) and suffer a complication to ignore one
of those breaches. Only one of these benefits may
apply in any given mission.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
173
: . Legion of Honor
The Legion of Honor is a commendation given to
Starfleet personnel who have acted in a way that exem-
plifies the best qualities of Starfleet.
§ COST: 4
§ CONDITIONS: None
§ BENEFIT: Once per mission, the character may per-
form one of the following: gain 2 bonus Momentum
on a successful task (bonus Momentum may not
be saved), or ignore a single complication suffered
on a task (choose to do this before the gamemaster
announces the complication’s effect).
: . Palm Leaf of
(X) Peace Mission
Palm Leaves of this sort are commendations awarded
to Starfleet officers who participate in successful peace
missions, such as that to the planet Axanar in the 23rd
century. In each case, the award includes the name of
the peace mission.
§ COST: 3
§ CONDITIONS: The mission in which this award was
earned must have involved securing peace between
warring nations, or the signing of a peace treaty. All
characters involved in the mission are eligible.
§ BENEFIT: Once per mission, when attempting a
Persuade task to prevent violence, the character
may automatically succeed at the task by spending
Momentum equal to the task’s Difficulty.
: . Star Cross
The Star Cross is a medal awarded to Starfleet person-
nel for distinguished actions.
§ COST: 3
§ CONDITIONS: None
§ BENEFIT: Once per mission, before attempting a task
that one of their focuses applies to, the character may
choose to double their focus range. For that task, the
character scores two successes for any die that rolls
equal to or less than twice their department rating (for
example, if the character has a department rating of 4,
any die that rolls an 8 or lower scores two successes
for that task).
174
CHAPTER 4
: . Starfleet Citation for
Conspicuous Gallantry
The Starfleet Citation for Conspicuous Gallantry is an
award declaring an act of heroism by a Starfleet officer.
§ COST: 2
§ CONDITIONS: The character must have succeeded
at a particularly heroic, risky, or daring action during
the mission.
§ BENEFIT: Once per mission, when the character
pays for an Immediate Momentum spend by adding
Threat, they may roll 1d20. If the result is equal to or
less than the character’s Daring, 1 Threat is immedi-
ately removed from the gamemaster’s pool.
: . Starfleet Decoration
of Gallantry
The Starfleet Decoration of Gallantry is a medal awarded
to Starfleet officers who show extreme bravery in the
line of duty.
§ COST: 2
§ CONDITIONS: The character must have faced an ex-
tremely difficult or dangerous situation and triumphed
despite the peril.
§ BENEFIT: Once per mission, whenever the charac-
ter suffers an Injury, halve the Severity of that Injury
before avoiding it.
: . Starfleet Medal
of Honor
The Starfleet Medal of Honor is a medal for valor pre-
sented to Starfleet personnel who are deemed to have
acted above and beyond the call of duty.
§ COST: 5
§ CONDITIONS: None. It is possible to earn this medal
multiple times.
§ BENEFIT: Once per mission, the character may gain
2 bonus Momentum on a successful task (bonus
Momentum may not be saved). If the character has
earned this medal multiple times, this benefit may be
used once per mission per Medal of Honor the char-
acter has earned, but no more than once per task.
: . Starfleet Surgeons’
Decoration
This is a special medal for valor awarded exclusively to
Starfleet medical personnel for acts above and beyond
the call of duty.
§ COST: 3
§ CONDITIONS: The character must be a Medical
officer of some description, who acted above and
beyond the call of duty in an attempt to save a patient
or patients or otherwise alleviate some medical crisis.
§ BENEFIT: Once per mission, the character may
reduce the Difficulty of a single Medical task by 2, to a
minimum of 1.
REPRIMANDS
YOU SUFFER REPRIMANDS WHEN YOU ARE
deemed to have acted inappropriately.
When you gain one or more Reprimands, you must
purchase one of the options listed below, but you do not
have to spend all of it immediately: you can leave some
Reprimands unspent, as a stain upon your reputation.
Reprimands not used increases the chances of gaining
more Reprimands on subsequent Reputation Rolls, as
noted on page 171.
: . Reprimands
TYPE COST DESCRIPTION
COURT
MARTIAL 5
DEMOTION 3
DETENTION 2
GAIN
ANTIPATHY Variable
REDUCE
REPUTATION Variable
SHAME BY
ASSOCIATION 2
STATUS 3
STRIPPED
OF AWARD Variable You are arrested and placed on trial for your actions. You have the right to legal counsel
in your defense, and the court martial proceedings should be resolved in-game.
The court will determine guilt or innocence, and pass sentence, which can include
dishonorable discharge from Starfleet and long-term incarceration in a penal facility
(which would usually require retiring the character and creating a new one).
You may accept demotion from your current rank, having proven yourself unworthy of the
status you attained. Reduce your rank by one step (i.e., from commander to lieutenant
commander, or from lieutenant to lieutenant (junior grade), etc.).
You are stripped of your duties and locked away for a short duration, forced to
contemplate your Reprimands in isolation. A character in detention cannot be used: you
must use a supporting character instead during the next mission.
Poor conduct earns enmity and makes enemies. You may declare an allied NPC you
encountered during the adventure regards you poorly. This uses 1 Reprimand normally,
but the cost increases by 1 if the NPC commands a starship (or has similar status), or 2 if
the NPC is an admiral, general, or other high-ranking figure.
You may reduce your Reputation by 1, using Reprimands equal to the Reputation you
previously held (that is, reducing Reputation from 3 to 2 costs 3 Reprimands). You may
only use this once per adventure.
If you are the commanding officer, you may stain the reputation of others aboard your
ship. This counts as one extra negative influence on each other main character’s
reputation roll, and it must be done before those characters roll.
With the gamemaster’s assistance, create an additional trait for the character, which reflects
their dishonor, cowardice, or disgrace, or remove a trait which represents something
positive. If the character is a commanding officer, they may add a trait to their ship instead.
If you have one or more awards, you may remove one or more of them to remove
Reprimands; each award removed uses Reprimands equal to its cost.
REPORTING FOR DUTy
175
CHAPTER 5
YOUR HOME
AMONG THE STARS
5.1 Starship Fundamentals 178
5.2 Starship Creation 192
5.3 Spaceframes 195
5.4 Mission Profiles and
Other Enhancements 212
5.5 Starship Talents 218
5.6 Starship Weaponry 226
5.7 Small Craft 232
JUSTIN USHER
177
: . CHAPTER 5.1
STARSHIP FUNDAMENTALS
“Admiral, this is an almost totally new Enterprise.
You don’t know her a tenth as well as I do.
- Captain Will Decker
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LT. COMMANDER
BURK VEN JAXA
I’m Lieutenant
Commander Burk
ven Jaxa, but you can
call me Burk. I’m the
chief engineer aboard
Challenger. I’ve been
asked to guide you
through this chapter,
which is all about
starships.
Your ship is your
home, your defense,
your place of work,
and, often, your
place of leisure and
entertainment. Your
ship is every bit as
important as any
crew member on
board. Let’s lay some
groundwork about
starships first, then get
‘under the hood’, to use
an old Earth phrase.
OPERATING A STARSHIP IS SIMILAR
to how characters act and interact. The
rules for tasks and challenges equally
apply to a character aboard a starship or
space station, and many of the activities
a character engages in aboard ship are
resolved the same way they would be if
on the surface of a strange new world.
Actions taken aboard a starship are no
different to actions taken anywhere else.
A starship is a location within which
the action takes place, rather than an
active element of that action. The tools
and resources available to the crew
can provide a significant benefit they
wouldn’t have elsewhere. For actions
taken aboard a ship, there are no innate
or inherent benefits, though there may
be some depending on where aboard
the ship the actions are attempted and
what facilities the ship has available.
§ Many shipboard locations have a
location trait representing that spe-
cific location’s function and the tools
found there. For example, a sickbay
contains tools and facilities for med-
ical procedures, while a transporter
room contains a ship’s transporter
systems.
§ Some shipboard locations have addi-
tional game mechanics effects, which
are described starting on page 186.
Actions taken with a starship always
benefit from the ship’s presence and
nature, because the ship is how the
actions are taken. These activities
involve the use of control systems within
the ship to make the ship do some-
thing, such as moving between planets,
firing torpedoes, or scanning celestial
phenomena. These actions usually in-
fluence something external to the ship,
rather than something inside it.
§ When a task is needed for an action
taken using a starship, it is typical for
the ship itself to assist, rolling a d20
against its own target number and
contributing any successes or com-
plications to the character performing
the action.
§ A starship determines its target
number by adding together one ship
system rating and one ship depart-
ment rating.
§ A starship treats every task it attempts
or assists with as if it had an applica-
ble focus. As a result, any d20 rolled
on behalf of the ship rolling equal to or
less than the relevant ship’s depart-
ment rating scores 2 successes.
§ Except with the gamemaster’s permis-
sion, no more than one character may
assist on a ship action (the character
being assisted is aided by the ship and
up to one other character).
§ A ship action may be further bol-
stered using Reserve Power, de-
scribed on page 185.
178
CHAPTER 5
STARSHIP DETAILS
LIKE CHARACTERS, STARSHIPS ARE REPRESENTED
using several mechanical elements, such as traits, sys-
tems, departments, focuses, and talents.
: . Starship Traits
A starship typically has one or more traits, which
help define what the ship is and what it can do, and
they can be employed in the same way as traits for a
location or situation, such as to increase or reduce the
Difficulty of tasks.
Different cultures manufacture their ships in myriad
different ways, and a cultural trait can encapsulate
those many little differences. A ship may have additional
traits reflecting other definitive elements of its construc-
tion or purpose—such as the ship’s class—or even the
influence of events the ship encountered.
JUSTIN USHER
Traits are neutral and may be applied both positively and
negatively. There is no fixed number of traits a ship may
have. Traits and their effects upon play are detailed on
page 250.
EXAMPLE: The Galaxy-class U.S.S. Enterprise, NCC-
1701-D, has four traits: Federation Starship, Galaxy
class, Federation Flagship, and Fifth Ship to Bear
the Name. The first trait is the ship’s origin—it is a
Federation starship, and anything affecting Federation
technology in a certain way, is impacted by this trait.
The second trait is the ship’s class, which may impact
the perceived prestige of the vessel or indicate some
practical realities, such as the ship’s dimensions and
general capabilities. The third trait reflects the fact
that the Enterprise is an honored and prestigious ves-
sel, and thus may impact how others perceive her and
her crew. The fourth trait notes the Enterprise is the
latest vessel in a long and famous lineage, and those
who know that history may regard the ship and her
crew differently than they might another ship.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
179
: . Starship Systems
Each starship is defined by six systems, which are sim-
ilar to a character’s attributes. They embody the ship’s
intrinsic capabilities compared to other vessels, and the
ways in which those capabilities are best employed. The
systems are Communications, Computers, Engines,
Sensors, Structure, and Weapons. Each system has a
rating which determines its measure, with higher num-
bers reflecting greater utility.
Characters may encounter situations in which more than
one of their ship’s systems apply. In these cases, it is im-
portant to consider the context of the situation and how
the character chooses to approach the problem. The
gamemaster may choose which system is most applica-
ble to a situation if more than one could be used.
The following matrix defines each system and offers
suggestions on how each system might be used.
SYSTEMS AND THEIR SUGGESTED USES
Comms
This system encompasses the trans-
mission, encryption, decryption, and
retrieval of subspace signals on a range
of frequencies, as well as a range of
other forms of signal transmission and
reception. Any task that involves or
relies upon communications systems
should use Communications (Comms).
A character might use a ship’s Communications when:
§ Attempting to clear up a signal distorted beyond all recognition, to
determine its origin or content.
§ Attempting to glean specific information from amongst an abundance
of signals.
§ Trying to generate interference to block or jam other signals.
§ Trying to coordinate many allied vessels during a crisis.
Computers
This system represents the ship’s library
and operational computer systems,
from the duotronic systems of the 23rd
century, to the isolinear and bioneural
systems of the 24th century, onward to
the advanced technologies found in the
32nd century. Any task that relies on the
processing power and data storage of
the ship’s computers uses Computers.
A character might use a ship’s Computers when:
§ Attempting to retrieve or research information stored within the ship’s
library.
§ Analyzing information gathered during an experiment or scan.
§ When creating a simulation of a situation or effect to try to predict how
it will unfold.
§ When trying to remotely perform some complex activity using automation.
Engines
This system covers the propulsion and
power generation systems of the vessel,
and its ability to move and maneuver
through space. This includes thrusters,
impulse engines, and warp drive, as well
as reactors, generators, and related sys-
tems such as the navigational deflector.
Any task that relies on moving the vessel
under its own power uses Engines.
A character might use a ship’s Engines when:
§ Attempting to maneuver the ship.
§ Trying to increase the ship’s power output.
§ Trying to project a particle stream or form of energy from the naviga-
tional deflector.
§ Attempting to pursue another vessel that is moving significantly faster.
180
CHAPTER 5
: . Starship Departments
In addition to the six ship systems, each ship is equipped
to support six departments, which encompass the
various mission profiles, specialties, and personnel each
ship carries. Each department is rated from 0 to 5, with
each rating representing resource allocation, technolo-
gy, and crew proficiency within that field. It is a rare for a
starship not to have at least a value of 1 in every depart-
ment—vessels are expected to fulfill a variety of roles
and carry out a wide range of missions.
The six departments mirror those used by characters—
Command, Conn, Engineering, Medicine, Science,
and Security—and their rating represents how much
support those fields receive aboard the ship. Each
department covers a wide range of activities, and some
activities may fit under more than one department, so
which one is most applicable to a given task depends
on the circumstances in a given scene more than any-
thing else.
Sensors
This system covers the vessel’s sensor
suites and probes, allowing it to scan
and monitor its surroundings, and the
scientific systems that interpret that
data. It also relates to transporters, as
they are tied into a ship’s sensors. Any
task that involves scanning and anal-
ysis using the vessel’s sensor arrays
should use Sensors.
A character might use a ship’s Sensors when:
§ Attempting to gain information about an object or phenomenon using
the ship’s sensors or a probe.
§ Attempting to beam a creature or object to or from a location.
§ Using internal analytical systems—such as those found in laboratories
or sickbay—to study an object or creature in depth.
§ When attempting to locate an intruder or foreign force moving within
the ship.
Structure
This system covers the physical
construction of the vessel, from its hull
and superstructure to the structural
integrity field and inertial dampeners,
as well as thermal and radiation shield-
ing, and all aspects of the ship’s basic
operational infrastructure, including
life support systems, and artificial
gravity. Any task that involves the phys-
ical construction of the vessel or its
protective systems uses Structure.
A character might use the ship’s Structure when:
§ Attempting to reinforce the ship against an external threat or hazard.
§ Altering life support to produce specific environmental conditions in a
specific compartment or section.
§ Engaging in activity where maintaining the ship’s integrity is vital.
Weapons
This system covers the tactical and
offensive systems of the vessel, normal-
ly phasers or disruptors, plus torpedo
launchers, and maybe even other
weapons besides. Any task that involves
attacking a target uses Weapons.
A character might use the ship’s Weapons when:
§ Attempting to fire on another vessel.
§ Destroying an object or obstacle.
§ Modifying a weapon system to produce an unusual or alternative effect.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
181
The matrixes on page 183-page 184 present sugges-
tions on how each ship system might interact with each
of the six ship departments.
: . Starship Focuses
Due to their size, advanced technology, and competent
crews, starships can be adapted to a wide range of
activities and operations. Unlike a character, a starship
does not have focuses, but instead treats every task it
attempts or assists with as if it had an applicable focus.
As a result, any d20 rolled on behalf of the ship rolling
equal to or less than the relevant ship’s department
rating scores 2 successes.
EXAMPLE: Lieutenant Ortegas attempts to maneuver
the Enterprise through the tail of a comet while evad-
ing enemy weapons fire. She uses Control + Conn
to determine her target number, and is assisted by
the ship’s Engines + Conn. For the ship’s assist die,
any result equal to or less than the Enterprise’s Conn
rating scores 2 successes.
: . Starship Talents
Starships have talents, usually representing areas of
design and equipment focus. Ship talents provide similar
benefits as character talents, but the context is deter-
mined by the starship rather than by character behav-
iors. Starbases and some small craft also have talents.
For more detail see STARSHIP TALENTS, starting on
page 218.
: . Scale
Vessels come in a wide range of sizes, from tiny shut-
tlecraft to stately cruisers and grand battleships. A
vessel’s Scale is a representation of its size, and it influ-
ences several other starship ratings. Scale is a number,
typically between 3 and 6 for most vessels, with larger
182
CHAPTER 5
: . Starship Scales
SCALE EXAMPLE VESSELS
1 Shuttles, fighters, worker bees
2 Runabout, Maquis raider, many types and
classes of civilian vehicles
3
Defiant-class starship, Jem’Hadar attack
ship, B’rel bird-of-prey, some freighters
4
Constitution-class starship, Intrepid-class
starship, Galor-class cruiser, Klingon D7
battlecruiser
5
Akira-class starship, Excelsior-class
starship, K’vort bird-of-prey, Vor’cha cruiser
6 Galaxy-class starship, Negh’var
battlecruiser, Jem’Hadar battlecruiser
7
D’deridex-class warbird, Odyssey-class
starship, Borg Sphere
8+
Borg Cube, Voth city-ships, Earth Spacedock,
Deep Space 9, Narendra Station, and most
other starbases and space stations
numbers representing bigger ships. Most vessels fall
into this range, though some exceptional craft—such
as Borg cubes—may be larger, while Scale 1 and 2 are
exclusively used for small craft such as shuttles and
runabouts. Starbases and space stations tend to have a
much higher Scale rating.
A starship’s Scale is used to determine several game
mechanics elements, but it relates most importantly
to the ship’s Resistance—a ship with a greater Scale
can resist attacks more easily and withstand greater
amounts of damage before systems are damaged or
destroyed.
Command
Conn
Engineering
SYSTEM AND DEPARTMENT INTERACTIONS
Command is the professionalism and organization of the ship’s crew and its chain of command. It also represents how
well the ship represents the virtues and nature of its culture, and conveys those things to both allies and outsiders.
§ Communications, to make an appropriate first
impression when contacting others, or to coordinate
effectively with other allied vessels during a crisis.
§ Computers, to study the culture of another culture
for a diplomatic briefing, or to research matters of
law and regulation.
§ Engines, to fly in precise formation, or on a precise
course.
§ Sensors, to scan or monitor a vast area in close co-
ordination with other vessels, or to try to discern the
disposition (friend or foe, etc.) of an unknown vessel.
§ Structure, to present a particular disposition to
another vessel or culture, or to adjust the internal
conditions of part of the ship to suit a guest or visitor.
§ Weapons, to fire a ‘warning shot’ to dissuade a
hostile vessel or when using weapons to produce
spectacular displays without inflicting damage.
Conn is the quality of the ship’s flight control and astronavigation systems, as well as the expertise of its flight crews and
the maintenance personnel responsible for maintaining those systems.
§ Communications, to relay a plotted course, or
detailed astrometric data, to another ship, either in
advance or in real-time during travel.
§ Computers, to study the astronomical phenomena
and spatial variations present within a region, and to
plot a course using that data, using the ship’s library
and records.
§ Engines, for most routine flight and maneuvering
operations, as well as emergency maneuvers.
§ Sensors, to analyze the astronomical phenomena
and spatial variations present within a region, and to
plot a course using that data.
§ Structure, to adjust the course, heading, and speed
of a vessel in a situation where the ship’s integrity
is under strain, or to alter the ship’s orientation to
present a more resilient facing.
§ Weapons, to maneuver the ship in such a way as to
maximize the effectiveness of the weapons.
Engineering represents the quality and quantity of the ship’s engineering and other technical personnel, as well as the
tools and facilities they work with.
§ Communications, to alter the communication sys-
tems to break through interference or function on a
non-standard frequency.
§ Computers, to research technical schematics within
the ship’s library, or to create a simulation of a device
or mechanism to test its function.
§ Engines, to adjust the output of reactors or propul-
sion systems, to produce a different effect.
§ Sensors, to perform diagnostics of a particular sys-
tem on the ship, or to operate the ship’s transporter.
§ Structure, to reinforce or alter the effects of the
ship’s defenses, structural integrity or inertial damp-
ener systems.
§ Weapons, to alter weapon systems to overcome
an unfamiliar form of defense or shielding, or when
using weapon systems for precision cutting.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
183
Security
medicine
science
184
Security represents the skill, training, and numbers of the ship’s security personnel, as well as other on-board security
systems such as containment fields, and the refinement and calibration of tactical systems.
§ Communications, to encrypt or decrypt classified in-
formation, or to intercept transmissions from others.
§ Computers, to create combat or tactical simulations,
or to use library archives to research the military
capabilities of other vessels or cultures.
§ Engines, to overcharge tactical systems (weapons,
shields, etc.) to create a greater effect.
§ Sensors, to try to discern the tactical capabilities of
another vessel, or to detect the presence of intruders
aboard their own ship.
§ Structure, to alter or reinforce the ship’s shields
against a specific threat, or to control the use of
internal force fields to contain intruders.
§ Weapons, to make attacks with the weapon systems
against an enemy.
Medicine represents the ship’s medical facilities (sickbay, and laboratories), as well as the personnel—doctors, nurses,
lab technicians, orderlies—who work there. Most of the uses of Medicine are internal to the ship—making use of the
facilities in the ship’s sickbay—rather than being able to be projected outwards.
§ Communications, to transfer large amounts of med-
ical information, such as patient data, or the formula
for a cure to a disease.
§ Computers, to study the ship’s medical databases,
or to analyze samples and tests taken from a patient.
§ Engines, to ensure a stable flow of power into sensi-
tive medical equipment.
§ Sensors, to diagnose the ailments of a patient using
a bio-bed or other sickbay scanner, or to gain more
detailed information about the nature of life-forms.
§ Structure, to create force fields that can contain or
filter airborne pathogens, or to create a controlled
environment for quarantine purposes.
§ Weapons, to design a biogenic or biochemical pay-
load for a torpedo.
Science represents the scientific personnel aboard the ship, their laboratories, their analytical facilities, and the other
tools and systems available for analyzing data and studying the unknown.
§ Communications, to attempt to translate or analyze
an unknown language or form of communication, or
to try to communicate with an unknown entity.
§ Computers, to use the ship’s library archives to
perform scientific research, or to analyze the results
of an experiment or simulation.
§ Engines, to produce a specific, unusual effect with
the navigational deflector, the warp field coils, or
some other aspect of the power and propulsion
systems.
§ Sensors, to scan and analyze spatial phenomena us-
ing the ship’s sensor arrays or a probe, or to examine
and study samples using sophisticated equipment in
the ship’s laboratories.
§ Structure, to create or implement a theoretical de-
fense against an unusual threat or hazard, or to alter
environmental systems to repel a parasite or other
hostile entity.
§ Weapons, to find the specific modulation, frequency,
or setting for a weapon system to achieve a specific
unusual effect.
CHAPTER 5
: . Resistance
Starships are designed to be resilient, for the rigors of
space exploration are considerable, and a vessel may
have to survive with little or no support for months or
even years at a time. This durability—a mixture of the
ship’s hull and spaceframe composition, the effective-
ness of the structural integrity field and deflector shields,
and redundancies built into vital systems—is expressed
as Resistance, which reduces incoming damage.
A ship’s Resistance is equal to half its Scale (round up),
plus a bonus based on the ship’s Structure rating, as
shown on the Structure and Resistance table.
EXAMPLE: The U.S.S. Enterprise NCC-1701-D has
Structure 10 and is Scale 6. Thus, its Resistance is 5
(half of Scale 6 rounded up is 3, +2 for Structure 10).
: . Shields
Starships and starbases are commonly equipped with
powerful deflector shields. These shields are designed
to protect vessels from attacks and hazards, deflecting
impacts and absorbing energy discharges. Shields are
not impervious to harm, and sufficient force and power
can weaken or even break through, damaging the hull
and other systems beneath.
A starship or starbase has a shields rating, which is
reduced when the ship suffers damage, and which can
be replenished through the actions of the crew and with
time. If a vessel suffers too much damage from a single
attack or hazard, it also suffers serious damage, which
impairs the ship’s functionality until repaired.
A ship has shields equal to its Structure plus its Scale
and Security, though other factors may modify this.
Shields have two breakthrough points similar to an ex-
tended task (see page 271 for more information on ex-
tended tasks): one at halfway along the track’s length, and
one at three-quarters of the way along the track. Shield
breakthroughs are explained in more detail on page 308.
: . Reserve Power
Vessels can generate massive amounts of power, but
much of that power is used for core systems such
as computers, propulsion, life support, sensors, and
shields. A ship has a finite reserve of energy, a surplus
capacity which can be spent to bolster or reinforce ship
actions, or which is held in reserve for emergencies.
Managing this power can mean the difference between
: . Structure and Resistance
SHIP’S STRUCTURE RESISTANCE
6 or lower +0
7-8 +1
9-10 +2
11-12 +3
13+ +4
success and failure for a ship and her crew, and a skilled
engineer can make the most of this valuable resource.
A ship begins each scene with Reserve Power—some-
thing the ship either has or doesn’t. The ship’s systems
are allocated sufficient energy from the reactors as
a matter of routine. However, a character may take
a Reroute Power major action (page 303) to divert
Reserve Power to a specific system. If the action is com-
pleted, the next time the ship uses that system to assist
on a task attempt, the ship’s assist die is counted as if it
had rolled a 1. However, each complication rolled counts
as two complications instead, as the excess power over-
loads and damages systems.
A few actions cannot be taken unless Reserve Power is
spent. These actions often have larger or more dra-
matic effects, or otherwise are things which cannot be
performed frequently. When you use Reserve Power for
these actions, the ship’s assistance die is rolled as usual.
The actions requiring Reserve Power include:
§ REGENERATE SHIELDS (see page 303)
§ REROUTE POWER (see page 303)
§ WARP (see page 302)
Regardless of how it is used, Reserve Power can be
used once per scene; regaining Reserve Power to use it
again requires the Regain Power major action.
: . Crew Support
Starships require a significant number of personnel to
function, and a skilled officer knows best when to assign
those personnel to different problems. Characters often
have the advantage of Crew Support, in the form of
these personnel.
The total amount of Crew Support available is deter-
mined by the ship—each vessel has a finite amount of
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
185
 How Many Shuttlecraft Do We Have?
One common question players may have is just how
many shuttlecraft are stored aboard their starship or sta-
tion. Star Trek technical manuals, online resources, and
even specific episodes often note specific quantities of
shuttlecraft for given classes of starships or stations.
However, the series writers tend to ignore the listed
quantities in favor of serving the story being told.
civilizations, gathering resources and fabricating re-
placement shuttlecraft are straightforward enough tasks
to ignore the need to keep track of how many shuttles
are aboard your vessel. The answer should usually be
“as many as we need.”
With the technologies and engineering know-how
available to Starfleet officers and other spacefaring
That being said, note that a ship’s capacity—the num-
ber of small craft it can carry—is different than the ship’s
Small Craft Readiness—the number of small craft the
ship can have activated in a scene.
crew on hand, most of whom will be busy on routine du-
ties to keep the ship running, and form part of the back-
ground of the ship’s standard activities. Spending Crew
Support brings members of the crew from that mass of
background activity into the forefront, putting focus on
them and making them an active and significant part of
a mission. Spending Crew Support to bring supporting
characters into play is described on page 146.
A ship’s standard allotment of Crew Support per mis-
sion is equal to the ship’s Scale, but may be modified
by other factors, such as talents.
transporters have reduced the need for shuttlecraft, there
are often circumstances where a shuttle is necessary.
A starship can support a finite number of active small
craft missions: launch bays have a finite amount of
space for operational craft, and a starship contains many
more small craft than can be operational at once. The
total number of small craft that may be active in a scene
is represented by the ship’s Small Craft Readiness rat-
ing, which is equal to the ship’s Scale minus 1. A ship’s
Small Craft Readiness may be modified by other factors,
such as talents.
: . Small Craft
Readiness
A starship contains several smaller craft for moving
personnel and cargo and for performing activities outside
the ship (such as making repairs on the hull). While
EXAMPLE: The U.S.S. Voyager is Scale 4, so has a
Small Craft Readiness rating of 3. The vessel can
support three active small craft in any given scene.
The ship may carry a dozen or more shuttlecraft, but it
can support only three active small craft at a time.
SHIP STATIONS AND FACILITIES
WHILE, IN THEORY, A STARSHIP COULD BE COM-
manded from a Personal Access Display Device (PADD)
while walking down a corridor, doing so would be
complicated in practice. For the efficient running of a
vessel, personnel should operate the ship from their
duty stations. Where you are on a starship matters when
it comes to what you’re trying to accomplish.
and each station is operated by a different officer, who all
work together to control the ship. Specific actions char-
acters can take at each station during a starship conflict
are detailed starting on page 300.
Different ship classes often have different bridge config-
urations, but there are several common stations found
on most bridges.
: . The Bridge
A ship is commanded from its bridge; nearly all aspects of
starship operations can be directed from there, controlled
by a selection of bridge officers. The bridge is home to sev-
eral stations set up to control different starship functions,
COMMAND STATION
Central to any bridge is the Command station, often
a captain's chair. More than merely a centralized seat
from which to oversee the bridge crew, most captain’s
186
CHAPTER 5
CRISTI BALANESCU
chairs are equipped with a limited set of controls, con-
figured to the captain’s needs. These controls often tie
into internal communications, navigation, or some other
function to which the captain desires quick access or
additional oversight.
COMMUNICATIONS
While communications functions can be accessed from
several different stations, many ships have a dedicated
comms station; this is especially the case with ships
in the 22nd and 23rd centuries. This station controls
all internal and external communications systems. The
communications officer is responsible for maintaining
and updating the universal translator, monitoring nearby
transmissions (including distress calls and signals from
hostiles), handling secure or encrypted communica-
tions, and coordinating crew activities such as security
responses and damage control teams.
These actions are usually assisted by the ship’s
Communications + Engineering. The specialized na-
ture of the controls at this station are designed to enable
complex tasks, so any Communications-related tasks
performed at this station reduce their Difficulty by 1.
HELM
The helm console—often referred to as the conn—pro-
vides control over the ship’s propulsion and maneu-
vering systems, and it is from here an officer pilots
the ship. This console often also provides access to
astronavigation and sensor systems, but some bridges
have a separate navigation console, with a two-person
helm and navigator team.
Characters at the helm can pilot the ship, directing
where the ship goes and maneuvering it around hazards
and dangers. These actions are usually assisted by the
ship’s Engines + Conn. If the helm also includes naviga-
tion, it allows a character to operate sensors and access
star charts to plan a course to a specific destination.
MULTI-ROLE CONSOLES
Several stations on the bridge are designed to be
configured to serve different purposes ...as the need
requires. Common configurations include:
§ ENGINEERING: A console duplicating the controls
from main engineering. This console is often used to
monitor engineering systems when close coordina-
tion between departments is vital.
§ ENVIRONMENT: Access to the ship’s environmen-
tal and life-support systems, allowing overrides of
automatic processes, and fine control of the environ-
mental conditions (temperature, gravity, atmospheric
composition, etc.) in any section of the ship.
§ MISSION OPERATIONS: A dedicated display of
telemetry and other information related to a specific
mission currently underway, such as information
gathered by an away team’s tricorders.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
187
Setting up a multi-role console to a specific purpose
is accomplished by creating a trait, which reduces the
Difficulty of tasks attempted that relate to that console’s
purpose by 1.
EXAMPLE: While pursuing a Borg Cube headed for
Earth, Lieutenant Commander La Forge moves from
main engineering to the bridge, and transfers control
of engineering systems to a bridge console. To do
this, he creates the trait “Engineering Console,” which
allows him to perform actions relating to main engi-
neering from the bridge.
OPERATIONS
The operations management station—often simply
called Ops—controls many of the ship’s internal sys-
tems, including managing the allocation of power and
computing resources to different departments aboard
the ship. It also incorporates communications systems
and the ship’s sensors, allowing the officer stationed at
Ops to monitor the ship’s situation.
Characters at the operations console can operate inter-
nal ship functions, such as allocating power to different
systems, operating transporters, adjusting environmen-
tal systems, and regenerating shields. These actions are
usually assisted by the ship’s Computers + Engineering.
SCIENCE
On the bridge, the science station serves to provide
detailed information about all manner of phenomena,
both those detected by the ship’s sensors and those
recorded within the ship’s library computers.
Characters at the science station have full access to and
control of the ship’s sensor arrays and probes, and detailed
controls and displays to analyze the information received.
These actions are usually assisted by the ship’s Sensors
+ Science. They also allow full access to the ship’s library
computers, allowing detailed research, which can be as-
sisted by the ship’s Computers + Science. The specialized
tools and controls available here are ideal for this kind of
work, reducing the Difficulty of these tasks by 1.
TACTICAL
The tactical console operates the ship’s offensive and
defensive systems: the weapons and shields, as well as
related systems such as tractor beams. Many tactical
stations also allow the officer to monitor and coordi-
nate the ship’s internal security, including operation
of communications—information security, handling of
188
CHAPTER 5
encrypted signals, and intercepting enemy transmis-
sions—as well as coordinating security teams, internal
doors, and forcefields. These actions are usually assist-
ed by the ship’s Weapons + Security.
: . Cargo Bay
All ships have resources the crew needs during their op-
erations, and these are stored within a cargo bay, cargo
hold, or cargo deck. Some resources may be intended
for delivery to a specific destination, while others are
for consumption by the ship and her crew (commonly
referred to as “ship’s stores”).
Cargo bays are often fitted with cargo transporters—
functionally the same as personnel transporters but set
to a lower resolution for bulk transport of inanimate car-
go, and unsuitable for living beings—which allows them
to be loaded and unloaded quickly and easily.
Most cargo bays can be transformed into other spac-
es as required; turning them into triage or emergency
medical facilities is common during a crisis, as is using
them as emergency quarters for evacuees.
Operating a cargo transporter functions identically to
operating any other transporter, but it cannot transport
living beings without significant modification (which
also reduces its capacity). Converting a cargo bay to
serve another purpose requires spending 2 Momentum
(Immediate); the cargo bay is considered converted at
the start of the following scene, and it gains an appropri-
ate trait (such as Emergency Medical Bay).
: . Engineering
Also called the engine room, engineering is the central
point for controlling all engineering systems aboard a ship,
especially those related to propulsion and power genera-
tion. The ship’s main reactor is in main engineering.
Characters in main engineering can operate internal ship
functions, such as allocating power to different systems,
adjusting environmental systems, and regenerating
shields. These actions are usually assisted by the ship’s
Computers + Engineering. Operating these systems
from main engineering is more efficient than from else-
where, reducing the Difficulty of associated tasks by 1.
As all systems eventually link to main engineering, main
engineering serves as a secondary control center for
the ship; most bridge functions can be duplicated from
main engineering, though not as efficiently. Increase the
complication range of any bridge function task by 1.
: . Holodeck
Holographic simulators have been available on starships
since the 23rd century. However, due to limitations in the
technology, true holodecks did not become widespread
among Starfleet and other major powers until the latter
half of the 24th century.
Holographic technology has two potential benefits.
The first is it allows a variety of difficult or dangerous
situations to be simulated, providing a valuable tool for
training and mission preparation. The second is it can
boost crew morale by enabling them to spend time in
simulations of environments not available on the ship.
: . Science Labs
Starfleet vessels are typically vessels of exploration, and
even vessels primarily serving peacekeeping or combat
roles often have space set aside for the study and analy-
sis of the unknown.
Each laboratory is outfitted to serve one scientific
discipline—such as astrophysics, biochemistry, hydro-
ponics, or stellar cartography—with tools and resources
dedicated to that specific field of inquiry. These resourc-
es are often highly specialized, with a narrow range
of applications, but able to provide information more
generalized scientific equipment cannot.
Most Starfleet ships have several dedicated laboratories
serving different purposes, and these can be changed
and refitted at a starbase or other facility. A player may
establish the presence of a specialized science lab once
per scene; the lab is counted as equipment, with an
opportunity cost 2, which requires naming a trait to de-
scribe the kind of laboratory it is, such as Genetics Lab
or Plasma Physics Lab. This trait has Potency 2 (see
Potent Traits, page 252) because labs are meant to be
ultra-specialized places for scientific work that can’t be
performed using conventionally available tools. Players
may establish a number of specialized laboratories per
mission equal to the ship’s Science rating.
: . Shuttlebay
A shuttlebay is where small craft are launched and
received, as well as where they are maintained and
repaired. Most shuttlebays are divided into two parts:
a launch bay, which opens out into space via a set of
large doors or a forcefield-covered opening (or both,
allowing the bay to remain pressurized while the doors
are open), and one or more hangars where craft are
stored, maintained, and repaired. Only a portion of a
 Computer, Begin
Program
If a holographic simulation requires task rolls, these can
be resolved as if the simulated events are real. For ex-
tended simulations, particularly of dangerous situations,
the gamemaster can create a separate virtual Threat
pool (1 virtual Threat per player character in the simula-
tion): during the simulation, any Threat added goes into
the simulation pool, and any Threat the gamemaster
spends comes from that pool, to represent the fake and
contained nature of the simulation. Similarly, all injuries
suffered in the simulation are removed at the end of the
simulation, regardless of what type they were.
Damage or malfunctions to the holodeck may disable
safety protocols, at which point all “simulated” Threat
is added to the gamemaster’s Threat pool, and means
injuries inflicted by the simulation are not removed.
Programming a new holographic simulation requires a
Control + Engineering task, with Difficulty determined
by how complex the simulation is (gamemaster’s discre-
tion; the gamemaster may even determine the simula-
tion is so complex it requires an extended task to create,
perhaps as a long-term activity worked on in downtime).
This is assisted by the ship’s Computers + Engineering.
Success creates an accurate simulation, which is a
reasonably-close approximation of reality. Failure means
the simulation is flawed or incorrect in some way, and
may produce unrealistic results.
ship’s total complement of small craft are active and
ready in the launch bay (represented by the ship’s Small
Craft Readiness rating), able to be used right away;
the rest are stored in hangars and take more time and
effort to prepare for use. Larger ships may have several
shuttlebays.
Shuttlebays can also be refitted to serve other purposes
in the same way as a cargo bay (see opposite). Doing
so prevents the refitted shuttlebay from being used for
small craft (which is why some larger ships have several
shuttlebays).
Characters may operate shuttles and other small craft
from a shuttlebay, up to the ship’s Small Craft Readiness
rating (page 186). Characters can temporarily double a
ship’s Small Craft Readiness by creating an appropriate
trait, but this takes time to carry out, and the benefit does
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
189
not take effect until the start of the next scene. Such an
increase lasts until the end of the current mission.
When operating a shuttle, the Thrusters minor action
is used for takeoff and landing, though this level of
detail rarely matters outside of combat and other action
scenes. You may not take off or land if the ship’s shields
are up.
: . Sickbay
Also called the medbay or the infirmary, sickbay is the
main medical center aboard a starship. Presided over by
the chief medical officer or the ship’s doctor (depending
on the size of the ship), sickbays provide comprehensive
medical care for crew and guests alike, ranging from
routine check-ups and treating injuries suffered during
normal duties, to complex surgical procedures, disease
outbreaks, and major disasters and medical crises.
Tasks for medical procedures performed within sickbay
reduce their Difficulty by 1 and can be assisted by the
ship’s Sensors or Computers + Medical or at the gam-
emaster’s discretion.
190
CHAPTER 5
WAYNE MILLER
: . Transporter Room
Since the mid-22nd century, most starships were out-
fitted with at least one (and commonly more) personnel
transporters. These transporter rooms contain both the
transporter pad and a dedicated control console, as well
as easy access to the transporter systems for regular
maintenance and upgrades. These rooms are major
sites of ingress and egress, and thus tend to contain
lockers containing equipment used by away teams. They
are often the place where important guests are received
by the captain.
A transporter has an effective range of several thousand
kilometers (typically 40,000km in the 24th century), and
a standard transporter room can transport up to six
people at once. Transporting from a transporter pad to
a destination transporter pad (a “pad-to-pad” transport)
is a Control + Engineering task with a Difficulty of 0,
assisted by the ship’s Sensors + Science. Transporting
from a transporter pad to another site (one without a
transporter pad), or vice versa, increases the Difficulty by
1, while a site-to-site transport (going from one location
without a pad to another location without a pad) increas-
es the Difficulty by 2.
These difficulties relate to operating a transporter from
the transporter room. Remote operation of a transporter
increases the Difficulty by 1 (in addition to any other
modifiers to Difficulty).
Deflector shields block transporter use—you cannot
beam a target up or down when your own shields are
active, and you cannot beam a target to or from a target
whose shields are active.
 Transporters
Can’t Do That...
As with many forms of technology, transporter usage
has several common limits and constraints. However, a
creative engineer can often figure out ways to circum-
vent those limitations where necessary.
In game terms, you might attempt to create a trait to rep-
resent an ingenious method of overcoming a limit. The
created trait gives you permission to do something you
normally couldn’t do (though the gamemaster is advised
to increase the task’s Difficulty by 1 or alter the task's
complication range).
EXAMPLE: The U.S.S. Enterprise is pursuing the
U.S.S. Phoenix, and Chief O’Brien must beam aboard
to reason with his former commanding officer, Captain
Ben Maxwell. O’Brien knows the Phoenix uses a
high-energy sensor system that cycles every 5.5 min-
utes, creating a window in the shields a fiftieth of a sec-
ond in duration. He’s confident he can beam through
that window, so spends 2 Momentum to create a trait
to be used as an advantage, Transport Window.
 Transporter Failures
and Accidents
Transporters are simultaneously extremely safe and
extremely unpredictable.
Transporters used in stable, normal conditions are a
safe, reliable, and quick means of moving long distanc-
es. Civilian-use transporters on populous worlds, and
the cargo transporters of freighters, and other such
routine uses are perfectly safe.
Transporter use by exploratory or combat vessels in un-
usual conditions—ion storms, nebulae, spatial phenom-
ena, and more—is a different matter. These are almost
always handled by a trained transporter operator, who
can react to sudden and unpredictable changes during
a transport.
In practice, transporters are designed to fail safely,
shutting down rather than risk causing harm. Lethal
transporter accidents are extremely rare.
In game terms, a failed task to operate a transport
means the transport simply doesn’t happen. Even
complications should result in mundane problems, such
as the transport being off target, or draining power, or
causing the transporter to stop working after use.
The classic “transporter accident” story isn’t necessar-
ily something that should happen by random chance.
Rather, it may be an outcome that results from the gam-
emaster spending Threat, or as a deliberate component
of a mission.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
191
: . CHAPTER 5.2
STARSHIP CREATION
“Well, this is a new ship, but she’s got the right
name. Now you remember that, you hear.
- Admiral Leonard McCoy
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LT. COMMANDER
BURK VEN JAXA
Your starship is as
important as your crew
of main characters.
This chapter walks
you through how to
create your starship
as a vital, important
part of your campaign.
Your crew will almost
certainly spend more
time on the ship than
in any other location
over the course of your
campaign, so it’s worth
taking the time to make
her meaningful and
memorable.
THE SPECIFICS OF EACH VESSEL’S
mission profile, the legacy of the events
they have been party to, the refits and
repairs they’ve undergone, and the
requirements of the crews that have
served aboard them make each starship
a distinct entity in more than just name.
Even two ships of the same class differ
in meaningful ways, as the lessons
learned in the construction and service
of previous ships of that class shape the
way their sister ships are assembled,
and the needs of the service shape the
way each individual vessel is outfitted
and configured.
The players’ starship is as unique as
their characters, having gone through
a process of creation and refinement.
If the players choose to command a
Constitution-class starship, theirs will
not be a facsimile of the legendary U.S.S.
Enterprise, but a distinct vessel with
its own proud history, and just as many
thrilling encounters yet to experience.
The rules in this chapter cover the ships
of the 22nd, 23rd, and 24th centuries,
and the first few years of the 25th cen-
tury. While Star Trek expands far beyond
those periods, the distant future of the
29th–32nd centuries—seen briefly in
time travel stories and in the later sea-
sons of Star Trek: Discovery—is beyond
the scope of this rulebook.
: . Timeframe
Collectively decide with your group on
when the game will take place. This
should be decided when everyone
agrees to play, as the era in which the
game is played will have an impact on
which spaceframes are available for use.
A broad timeline of the Star Trek
universe can be found inside the back
cover, and eras of play are discussed in
ERAS OF PLAY, starting on page 30.
It is most common for games to be set in
years depicted in the shows and movies,
as those years will be the most familiar
to players. However, setting a game
a less-developed era allows greater
freedom to play without being overshad-
owed by canonical names and events.
This choice will have wider impact on
the state of the universe and the devel-
opment of technology: a game set dur-
ing the Earth-Romulan War (2156–2160)
will have very different expectations with
regards to politics and technology than
one set in 2402, after the events of Star
Trek: Picard.
Starship creation follows a specific pro-
cess, as follows.
: . Spaceframe
A vessel’s spaceframe (or class) is its
basic superstructure, core systems,
operational infrastructure, and all the
other elements common to every ves-
sel of the same class.
Choose a single class for your starship.
This will provide a collection of abili-
ties that serve as the baseline for the
starship—the ship’s base scores for its
192
CHAPTER 5
systems, its Scale, modifiers towards its departments,
and what weaponry it is equipped with. These may be
modified by choices of mission profile, service record,
and refits.
Each class also lists the year the class entered service
and provides basic traits common to all ships of that class.
Some classes may also provide talents, denoting func-
tions or special technologies that are built into ships of
that class. These talents cannot be changed or swapped
out at the start of the game. The list of spaceframes
provided in this rulebook begins on page 197. Other
Star Trek Adventures supplements provide additional
spaceframe options.
: . Mission Profile
A ship’s mission profile is a key part of what distinguish-
es one ship of a class from her sister ships. It determines
how the ship will be equipped, what facilities and per-
sonnel are assigned to it, and what kind of operations it
will be expected to perform.
Choose a mission profile for your starship. This will
provide the baseline ratings for each department, repre-
senting specialized equipment, crew assignments, and
prioritization of resources. It will also provide at least one
talent chosen from a short list designed to support the
specific mission. The list of mission profiles begins on
page 212.
: . Service Record
Next, you may choose a single service record for the
ship. This choice may be limited based on how long the
ship has served for (the difference between the cam-
paign’s timeframe and the year the ship’s spaceframe
entered service).
Each service record provides an additional trait for the
ship, reflecting alterations and modifications made
during the ship’s service, as well as the effect of the
ship’s reputation or status. These also provide an addi-
tional special rule that affects the ship in some small,
thematic way. Service records are listed beginning on
page 216.
: . Refits
Most ships receive one or more refits based on the
length of the ship’s service: one refit for every full 10
years of the ship’s service. These represent periodic
upgrades and improvements the ship receives during its
STARSHIP CREATION
PROCESS
Step one: Timeframe
Select the year the game is set. The year helps deter-
mine which spaceframes are available in that era.
page 192 page 192
Step Two: Spaceframe
Select a spaceframe, or class, for your starship.
page 197 page 197
Step Three:
Mission Profile
Select a single mission profile for your starship.
page 212 page 212
Step Four:
Service record
You may choose a single service record reflecting the
ship’s service record (or, if the ship is brand new, possi-
bly a lack of history).
page 216 page 216
Step five: Refits
Select or determine refits, if needed.
page 217 page 217
lifespan. These refits each add 1 to a single ship’s sys-
tem. The specifics of these improvements are left vague,
to fit with any point in the timeline and the evolving
nature of technology. Refits are detailed on page 217.
EXAMPLE: The group decides to set their game in
2280 and selects a Constitution-class spaceframe.
The Constitution entered service in 2243, a difference
of 37 years, so the players assign three refits to their
ship during ship creation.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
193
: . Putting it All
Together
Once the game’s year, the starship’s class, mission
profile, service record, and refit(s) have been chosen, it’s
time to put all those things together:
§ TRAITS: A starship will have several traits determined
during the creation process. One of these will indicate
the culture that produced the ship (or denote the ship
as being independent), as well as the broad classifi-
cation of the ship—Federation starship, Klingon bird-
of-prey, Romulan warbird, Bolian freighter, etc.—while
others may denote why the ship is notable or unusual.
Another will come from the ship’s service record, if
selected.
§ SYSTEMS: A starship’s systems are determined by its
class, and then modified by mission profile, service
record, and refits. No system rating may be increased
beyond 12, though it may have a system with a base
score above 12 if that score came from the space-
frame, before any modifications. If a ship has a system
with a modified score above 12, reduce the score to
12 and assign those points to other systems.
§ DEPARTMENTS: A starship’s departments are deter-
mined by its class, mission profile, service record, and
refits. No department rating may be above 5: if a ship
has a department rating above 5, reduce it to 5, and
assign those points to other departments.
§ TALENTS: A starship should have a number of talents
equal to its Scale. Some of these may be determined
by the ship’s spaceframe, and at least one should be
determined by the ship’s mission profile. If, at this
stage, the ship has fewer talents than its Scale, select
additional talents until it has the required number.
Talents can be found starting on page 218. This limit
only applies when the ship is first created—a ship
which has been improved during play may obtain
additional talents.
§ SCALE: A starship’s Scale is determined by its class.
§ RESISTANCE: A ship’s Resistance is equal to half its
Scale (round up), plus a bonus based on its Structure,
as shown on the Structure and Resistance table on
page 185. Talents may modify Resistance further.
§ SHIELDS: A starship has maximum shields equal to
its Structure plus its Scale and Security. Talents may
modify this further.
§ CREW SUPPORT: A starship’s Crew Support is equal
to its Scale. This may be modified further by character
talents and/or ship talents.
194
CHAPTER 5
§ WEAPONS: A starship’s weapons are determined
by its spaceframe. The damage weapons inflict is
increased based on the ship’s Weapons score, plus
additional factors from the type of weapon. These var-
iations are described in Starship Weapons, starting
on page 226.
§ THE BRIDGE: The arrangement of the ship’s
bridge—which stations are present, and which are
grouped together for convenience—should be de-
cided upon by the group. See page 186 for informa-
tion on bridge stations.
: . Finishing Touches
Once all the game mechanics are in place, the ship is
ready, but for a couple of minor details.
First, every starship needs a name. The Federation has
no universal convention for naming ships, often nam-
ing them after locations, important historical persons,
ancient ships, mythical figures, or even more abstract
ideals, virtues, or concepts.
Klingon naming is similar, but Klingons exclusively name
their vessels in tlhIngan Hol, the primary language of
the Klingon Empire. Romulans, as with all things, seldom
share the meanings behind the names of their ships,
but they are likely to have a similar cultural significance.
Other species name their vessels as they see fit.
In all cases, a Federation starship’s name is prefixed with
‘U.S.S.’. Klingon ships tend to be prefixed ‘I.K.S.’, Romulan
ships are prefixed ‘I.R.W.’, at least under the Romulan
Star Empire. Other cultures have their own prefix con-
ventions, if they have any at all.
If the players are unable to think of a name, perhaps
consider looking at Starfleet vessels that have appeared
briefly on the shows, or which are mentioned by name
but never seen, and using those names—it can add
to the feeling of playing in the Star Trek universe by
playing with a ship that has even a small part in the
franchise, without necessarily needing to be aboard a
ship named Enterprise.
Each Federation starship also has a registry number
(non-Federation ships do not generally use a registry).
This is a number prefixed by either the letters NCC or
NX. NCC is used for most ships, with NX reserved for
prototype vessels and the first ship of a class, in honor
of the first Human starships able to reach Warp 5.
: . CHAPTER 5.3
SPACEFRAMES
“Intrepid class. Sustainable cruise velocity
of warp factor nine point nine seven five.
Fifteen decks. Crew complement of one hundred
and forty-one. Bio-neural circuitry.
- Lieutenant Stadi
NOT ONLY IS EVERY STARSHIP IN A
class unique, but each spaceframe is
a creation of thousands of engineers,
scientists, and dockyard workers and
automated drones. Every spaceframe
built represents the overall philosophy
its culture has for the class’s place in
the Galaxy, what it wishes the class to
accomplish, and how it feels about its
spacefaring personnel.
SPACEFRAME DETAILS
EACH SPACEFRAME INCLUDES THE
following information:
§ LAUNCH YEAR: The year the space-
frame entered service.
§ OVERVIEW: Information about the
spaceframe’s design history and
purpose.
§ CAPABILITIES: Details about the
spaceframe’s capabilities.
§ REFITS AND VARIANTS: Any informa-
tion regarding upgrades the space-
frame received over time, or specific
variants of the spaceframe in service.
§ SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES:
Suggestions on which mission
profiles are commonly used with the
spaceframe.
§ NAMING CONVENTIONS: Details on
naming conventions for the space-
frame, if any.
§ NOTABLE EXAMPLES: The names of
notable vessels of this class.
§ TRAITS: Traits related to the
spaceframe.
§ SYSTEMS: The base ratings of the
spaceframe’s systems.
§ DEPARTMENTS: Modifiers to the rat-
ings of the spaceframe’s departments
(which are determined by the mission
profile selected for the ship).
§ SCALE: The Scale of the spaceframe.
§ WEAPONS: Any weaponry installed
on the spaceframe.
§ TALENTS: Any talents built into the
spaceframe.
§ SPECIAL RULES: Any additional
rules or other details relevant to ships
using this spaceframe.
LT. COMMANDER
BURK VEN JAXA
The spaceframe, or
class, your group
selects for your starship
is the foundation for all
that follows in starship
creation. It’ll establish
the look and feel of
your vessel as well as
its general capabilities,
mission expectations,
and overall purpose.
Choose wisely.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
195
SPACEFRAME SPECIAL RULES
SOME SPACEFRAMES HAVE SPECIAL RULES, REPRE-
senting specifics of their construction and configuration.
These are permanent parts of how the ship is designed
to function. These are separate from ship talents in that
they cannot be removed, and do not count towards
the ship’s total number of talents. Other Star Trek
Adventures supplements provide additional starship
special rules.
: . POLARIZED HULL PLATING
Vessels of this spaceframe lack deflector shields
common to many other ships, and instead rely upon
polarization of the hull plating to resist damage. The
ship’s Shields track instead represents the state of the
ship’s polarized hull. The ship’s Shields are equal to its
Structure, with no additional modifiers. However, these
do not count as shields for the purposes of blocking
transporter use.
: . ABUNDANT PERSONNEL
The ship’s Crew Support is doubled, after any other mod-
ifiers, and any effects or abilities which would increase
Crew Support have twice the normal effect aboard a
ship with this special rule. Further, when you introduce a
supporting character, you may use one additional Crew
Support to grant them an improvement immediately.
: . Compact Vessel
This spaceframe has a Scale of 2, but it does not count
as a small craft. It has no small craft capability of its own,
and cannot launch or receive shuttlepods, shuttlecraft,
or any comparable craft.
: . SAUCER SEPARATION
Vessels of this class have the capability to detach their
saucer section in an emergency. Once the saucer
has detached, the two sections of the ship cannot be
reconnected outside of a drydock. Ship’s systems are
halved (round up) for the saucer and the secondary
hull when separated, the saucer is unable to enter
warp speeds or launch small craft, and each section is
considered a separate vessel with Scale 1 less than the
original vessel; the secondary hull is commanded from
main engineering. The saucer can land on a planetary
surface with emergency landing gear.
: . GRAPPLER CABLE
The ship utilizes a physical cable with a magnetic hook
at the end, in place of the graviton-based tractor beams
used by ships in later eras. This functions as a tractor
beam, but if the target breaks free, roll a d20: if you roll
above the ship’s Weapons system, the cable is damaged,
and cannot be used until repaired. Repairing the cable is
treated as repairing a breach.
: . SAUCER SEPARATION
AND RECONNECT
The ship is designed so the saucer section can be
separated from the engineering section to operate as
two distinct ships. Each section has the same systems,
talents, and weapons, but their Scale is 1 lower than that
of the original vessel (recalculate anything derived from
Scale). Further, if the ship suffered any breaches prior
to separating, ongoing effects of those breaches apply
equally to both sections. The saucer section, which
usually contains the crew quarters and recreation areas,
does not have the capacity to go to warp. The secondary
hull is commanded from main engineering.
: . LANDING GEAR
The vessel is equipped to land safely on a planetary
surface, and can return to space afterward. To land a
ship requires Reserve Power be rerouted to Structure,
and then requires someone at the helm to attempt a
Control + Conn task with a Difficulty equal to the ship’s
Scale, assisted by the ship’s Structure + Conn. This
can Succeed at Cost. Success means the ship lands on
the planet’s surface. Taking off requires the same task
attempt, but the Difficulty is reduced by 2.
Separating is a major action attempted from the bridge
(Operations panel) or main engineering, requiring a
Control + Conn task with a Difficulty of 3, assisted by the
ship’s Structure + Engineering. Reconnecting takes a
major action, but the process is automated and requires
no task attempt. Separating and reconnecting cannot
be completed if the ship (or either part of it) has suffered
one or more breaches to Structure.
196
CHAPTER 5
STARFLEET SPACEFRAMES
THROUGHOUT ITS EXISTENCE, STARFLEET HAS DEVELOPED AND BUILT HUNDREDS OF SPACEFRAMES FOR EX-
perimental use or mass production and service. Following is a selection of spaceframes for you to choose your group’s
starship. Other Star Trek Adventures supplements offer additional Starfleet and Federation spaceframes.
NX
LAUNCH YEAR: 2151
OVERVIEW: Designed and developed by Zefram
Cochrane’s Warp Five Project and the joint Starfleet/
United Earth Space Probe Agency NX Project, the
NX class was groundbreaking in nearly every
way. Its large saucer-like hull was different
from earlier spherical or cylindrical hulls of
most UESPA vessels. The ship also had two
long warp nacelles connected to trailing
pylons, isolating the experimental warp coils
from the rest of the ship.
CAPABILITIES: At the time of its launch, the NX class
was the fastest starship in service to United Earth. The
spaceframe was capable of cruising at warp 4.5 and
could produce emergency speeds of warp 5.2 in short
bursts. In an era before energy shielding, the spaceframe
boasted an impressive amount of polarized hull-plating
that helped protect the inner hull and inhabited areas.
The spaceframe had the capability of launching two
shuttlepods, with a third held in reserve.
REFITS AND VARIANTS: NX-class vessels were used
during the decade prior to the Earth-Romulan War and
rarely afterward. The largest refit was conducted during
the war, adding a secondary hull with an improved warp
core and additional weapon systems.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Multirole Explorer,
Technical Testbed.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: NX-class vessels utilize
names from famous Earth ships—both maritime vessels
and early spacecraft—often names with long legacies.
NX-class vessels have registries that begin with NX, and
are numbered sequentially.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: NX-01 Enterprise,
NX-02 Columbia
ENGINES 06
SENSORS 06
Starship
TRAITS: United Earth Starship, NX class
SCALE: 3
Systems
COMMS 05
COMPUTERS 05
Departments
COMMAND
—
ENGINEERING +1
CONN +1
SECURITY
—
Weapons
§ Phase Cannons
§ Spatial Torpedoes
§ Grappler Cable (Strength 2)
Talents
STRUCTURE 06
WEAPONS 06
MEDICINE
—
SCIENCE +1
§ HIGH-RESOLUTION SENSORS: See page 223.
Special Rules
§ GRAPPLER CABLE: See page 196.
§ POLARIZED HULL PLATING: See page 196.
THOMAS
MARRONE
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
197
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
CONSTITUTION
LAUNCH YEAR: 2243
OVERVIEW: The symbol of Starfleet in the
mid-to-late 23rd century,
the Constitution
class became
legendary due to
its five-year mis-
sions that expanded the
Federation’s borders and its scientific
knowledge. The Constitution class became the testbed of
new technologies in the early 2270s developed out of the
five-year missions and lessons learned from the brief war
with the Klingon Empire. The spaceframe continued in
service until the mid-24th century.
CAPABILITIES: The Constitution class defined what a
starship should be able to accomplish when on extend-
ed deep-space exploration assignments. The space-
frame had accommodations for over 400 crew members,
enough to provide redundancy for crew positions rang-
ing from astrocartographers to xenobiologists, allowing
for crew losses typical on five-year missions. The ship
had a spacious shuttlebay and cargo area at the aft of
the secondary hull that allowed the class to move large
amounts of supplies or personnel even without the use
of transporters.
REFITS AND VARIANTS: Vessels produced by other
founding members of the Federation tended to focus on
their own fleets’ specialties. Andorian-built vessels had
larger fusion reactors and Tellarite-built vessels were
sought after for their powerful duotronic computer net-
works. Vulcan-produced vessels focused on improving
sensors and communications.
ENGINES 08
SENSORS 08
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Multirole Explorer,
Strategic and Diplomatic Operations, Flagship, Scientific
and Survey Operations.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: Constitution-class vessels
are often named after famous Earth navy vessels and
pre-warp spacecraft. Registry numbers range between
1700 and 1799, though there are exceptions.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: U.S.S. Enterprise (NCC-1701),
U.S.S. Lexington (NCC-1709), U.S.S. Defiant
(NCC-1764), U.S.S. Challenger (NCC-2023)
Starship
TRAITS: Federation Starship, Constitution class,
Member World Starship (depending on species pri-
marily crewing the vessel)
SCALE: 4
Systems
COMMS 07
COMPUTERS 07
Departments
COMMAND +1
ENGINEERING
—
CONN
—
SECURITY +1
Weapons
§ Phaser Banks
§ Photon Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 3)
Talents
STRUCTURE 07
WEAPONS 07
MEDICINE
—
SCIENCE +1
§ MODULAR LABORATORIES: See page 224.
§ RUGGED DESIGN: See page 225.
Special Rule
§ SAUCER SEPARATION: See page 196.
198
CHAPTER 5
THOMAS
MARRONE
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
EXCELSIOR
LAUNCH YEAR: 2285
OVERVIEW: What was originally intended as a testbed
for the highly experimental “transwarp” propulsion
system, the “Great Experiment” was seen as a disaster
after the complete failure of Excelsior’s pro-
pulsion systems in 2285. After a total
redesign was performed on nearly
all ship’s systems, the transwarp
propulsion was replaced with
standard warp propulsion. The
versatile Excelsior spaceframe
became a standard sight across the
Federation and beyond, and it continued
to be manufactured into the 2390s.
CAPABILITIES: Originally intended for the large tran-
swarp coils, the spaceframe’s nacelles provided ample
room for extra standard coils that allowed the class to
have some of the highest sustained warp speeds for a
ship of its size. Stemming from the initial high-power
needs for the transwarp system, the spaceframe had
nearly double the amount of fusion reactors required for
secondary power systems and the impulse drive. These
same reactors provide extra power to the ship’s defen-
sive shielding. The Excelsior also had two dedicated
shuttlebays, the main shuttlebay and a lower bay on the
underside of the secondary hull used for cargo transport
and storage.
REFITS AND VARIANTS: A single variant built at San
Francisco Shipyards spread across the Federation.
While visually similar to the standard spaceframe, the
saucer section of the vessel contained double the num-
ber of fusion reactors and added two additional impulse
drive units. The incredible sublight acceleration this
provided meant the secondary hull had two extensions
built to contain improvements to the inertial dampeners.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Strategic and
Diplomatic Operations, Multirole Explorer, Technical
Testbed.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: Excelsior-class vessels take
names from concepts of exploration, achievement, and
great leaders from across the Federation; many are also
named after famous ships from previous generations.
Forrest, Archer, and Victory are all examples.
ENGINES 09
SENSORS 08
Starship
TRAITS: Federation Starship, Excelsior class,
Starfleet Mainstay, Long-serving
SCALE: 5
Systems
COMMS 08
COMPUTERS 07
Departments
COMMAND +1
ENGINEERING +2
CONN
–
SECURITY
–
Weapons
§ Phaser Banks
§ Photon Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 4)
Talents
§ IMPROVED WARP DRIVE: See page 224.
§ SECONDARY REACTORS: See page 225.
Special Rule
§ SAUCER SEPARATION: See page 196.
STRUCTURE 09
WEAPONS 08
MEDICINE
SCIENCE
–
–
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: U.S.S. Excelsior (NCC-2000),
U.S.S. Enterprise (NCC-1701-B), U.S.S. Hood
(NCC-42296)
THOMAS
MARRONE
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
199
AMBASSADOR
LAUNCH YEAR: 2335
OVERVIEW: Starfleet had been rely-
ing on Excelsior-class and the few
Constitution-class starships still in
service to continue its aims of discovery,
but even with the planned refits of those
spaceframes, they still required visits to logisti-
cal hubs every five years as systems wore down. Utopia
Planitia Fleet Yards began to develop a new deep-space
exploration cruiser that would address these concerns.
The Ambassador class was developed and launched,
and many of the engineering techniques, design ideas,
and technologies created would be refined and become
the basis for the Galaxy class.
CAPABILITIES: The Ambassador class was designed
in a similar way to previous Starfleet cruisers, with a
saucer-shaped primary hull and a cylindrical secondary
engineering hull. The most obvious difference is the
then-unique warp nacelles containing high-efficien-
cy warp coils with directional subspace buffers. The
Ambassador class was wildly successful, but also a
victim of its own innovation. Research and development
continued on the ground-breaking systems, improving
them faster than they could be installed, and it became
apparent the Ambassador class wasn’t able to keep up
with technological development. Production was halted
on further spaceframes, replacing newer construction
with the Galaxy class beginning in the 2360s.
REFITS AND VARIANTS: Two separate refit programs
were used. The Enterprise program improved the ves-
sel’s subspace communication and sensor platforms.
The Pollux program was dedicated to improving the
vessel’s weapon systems and warp drive.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Multirole Explorer,
Scientific and Survey Operations, Strategic and
Diplomatic Operations.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: Ambassador-class vessels
are often named after important ambassadors and
peacemakers, great battles and ships of the past, or
hopeful ideas for the future. T’Pau, Merrimack, and
Progress are all examples. The U.S.S. Ambassador had
a registry of NX/NCC-10521, and subsequent vessels
have higher registries.
Starship
TRAITS: Federation Starship, Ambassador class
SCALE: 5
Systems
COMMS 09
ENGINES 09
COMPUTERS 09
SENSORS 09
Departments
COMMAND +1
ENGINEERING
–
CONN +1
SECURITY
–
Weapons
§ Phaser Arrays
§ Photon Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 4)
Talents
STRUCTURE 09
WEAPONS 09
MEDICINE
–
SCIENCE +1
§ HIGH-RESOLUTION SENSORS: See page 223.
§ IMPROVED IMPULSE DRIVE: See page 223.
Special Rule
§ SAUCER SEPARATION: See page 196.
200
CHAPTER 5
THOMAS
MARRONE
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: U.S.S. Excalibur (NCC-26517),
U.S.S. Enterprise (NCC-1701-C), U.S.S. Yamaguchi
(NCC-26136)
CALIFORNIA
LAUNCH YEAR: 2358
OVERVIEW: As the Federation spread in the 2350s,
Starfleet saw a lack of vessels able to respond to
needs of all kinds inside the borders. Starfleet
asked member worlds to design and build
their own starship class to be able to respond
to issues they felt were pressing to their own in-
terests. Earth presented the California class, which
would go on to influence the design of the Galaxy
class. California-class vessels were seen as
dependable workhorses.
CAPABILITIES: California-class
vessels included a dedicated
section to provide the growing number of Cetaceans
graduating from Starfleet Academy a more natural en-
vironment in which to work and live. These vessels also
included multiple shuttlebays allowing Cetacean and
humanoid crew access to small craft. California-class
vessels contained most of their livable volume in their
primary saucer-like hull. The secondary hull contained
main engineering, primary antimatter storage, and the
main deflector array. This entire section could be ejected
in an emergency and limited warp propulsion could be
maintained by the ship’s fusion reactors.
REFITS AND VARIANTS: Most refits centered on im-
proving the power output of the warp reactor or improv-
ing power output from the phaser arrays.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Logistical/
Quartermaster, Colony Support, Reserve Fleet, Scientific
and Survey Operations, Crisis and Emergency Response.
California-class ships are support vessels, intended
to perform the unglamorous but necessary work that
keeps the Federation running, and their livery often
reflects their mission profile.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: California-class vessels are
named after locations found within the North American
state of California. Burbank, Fresno, and West Covina
are examples.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: U.S.S. Cerritos (NCC-
75567), U.S.S. Oakland (NCC-75012), U.S.S. Solvang
(NCC-12101)
ENGINES 08
SENSORS 09
Starship
TRAITS: Federation Starship, California class
SCALE: 4
Systems
COMMS 10
COMPUTERS 10
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING +1
CONN
–
SECURITY
–
Weapons
§ Phaser Arrays
§ Photon Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 3)
Talents
§ DEDICATED PERSONNEL: See page 220.
§ EXTENSIVE SHUTTLEBAYS: See page 223.
STRUCTURE 10
WEAPONS 08
MEDICINE +1
SCIENCE +1
THOMAS
MARRONE
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
201
GALAXY
LAUNCH YEAR: 2359
OVERVIEW: The
Galaxy class was
designed to surpass
any exploration and
science vessel yet devel-
oped by Starfleet. This space-
frame also represented a new philosophy for
crew mental well-being on long duration assignments,
as Starfleet provided facilities for civilian dependents
and volunteers. The concept centered on not separating
families from loved ones for years at a time, and the mo-
rale on Galaxy-class vessels was correspondingly higher.
CAPABILITIES: As one of the largest spaceframes man-
ufactured by Starfleet, the interior volume of was often
not fully allocated by the time it began its first mission
assignment. This modular customization meant these
vessels often had civilian specialists on board for even
the most obscure research paths. As the Galaxy class
was meant to probe far away from Federation space, the
vessel had both the most powerful warp core of its day
and the most advanced warp coils, allowing even a ship
of its size to maintain a cruising warp velocity of 6 and a
maximum velocity of warp 9.8. Galaxy class vessels were
also the first that could separate and re-dock their pri-
mary hull to the engineering hull without the assistance
of a drydock or support vessels. This meant Galaxy-class
vessels could split their focus efficiently, or put civilians
and dependents out of harm’s way in hostile situations.
REFITS AND VARIANTS: During the Dominion War,
Galaxy-class vessels nearing completion were repur-
posed as command-and-control vessels for rear admi-
rals to use in fleet actions.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Strategic and
Diplomatic Operations, Scientific and Survey Operations,
Multirole Explorer.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: Galaxy-class vessels take
their names from many different cultures across the
Federation. Most are associated with exploration and
scientific discovery. Odyssey, Hanson, and Surok are ex-
amples. The U.S.S. Galaxy was NX/NCC-70637, and all
vessels of the class have registries higher than this, bar-
ring the Enterprise, which used its own legacy number.
Starship
TRAITS: Federation Starship, Galaxy class, A City in Space
SCALE: 6
Systems
COMMS 09
ENGINES 10
STRUCTURE 10
COMPUTERS 10
SENSORS 08
WEAPONS 10
Departments
COMMAND +1
ENGINEERING
–
MEDICINE +1
CONN
–
SECURITY
–
SCIENCE +1
Weapons
§ Phaser Arrays
§ Photon Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 5)
Talents
§ MODULAR LABORATORIES: See page 224.
§ REDUNDANT SYSTEMS: See page 225.
Special Rules
§ ABUNDANT PERSONNEL: See page 196.
§ SAUCER SEPARATION AND RECONNECTION:
See page 196.
202
CHAPTER 5
THOMAS
MARRONE
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: U.S.S. Enterprise
(NCC-1701-D), U.S.S. Odyssey (NCC-71832),
U.S.S. Yamaguchi (NCC-71854)
INTREPID
LAUNCH YEAR: 2371
OVERVIEW: Containing the best technology of the early
2370s and evolved from the Nova class’s design, the
Intrepid class was a symbol of the Federation Science
Council’s intent to have Starfleet return to its
goals of exploration and science. The
Dominion War reduced the number of
hulls constructed, but the end of
the war—and the return of U.S.S.
Voyager in 2378—meant
renewed passion for this
spaceframe. Many Intrepid-
class vessels remain in
active service well into the
25th century.
CAPABILITIES: The Intrepid class was designed around
being as efficient in its warp field geometry as possi-
ble, while also allowing for rapid transit of turbulent
space-time. The vessel also has variable geometry warp
nacelles that allow fine adjustment to the warp field,
improving warp stability, allowing high sustained warp
speeds, and granting an impressive maximum emergen-
cy speed of warp 9.975. Intrepid-class vessels were the
first to have bioneural computer components installed
to augment the advanced isolinear computer core.
These bioneural systems allowed the ship to “learn” as
it formed data connections in a more efficient way than
standard isolinear indexing.
REFITS AND VARIANTS: Refits for the Intrepid class
focused on improving and expanding the sensor
platforms.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Pathfinder and
Reconnaissance Operations, Scientific and Survey
Operations, Technical Testbed.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: Intrepid-class vessels take
names from mythology and space exploration across the
Federation. Pathfinder, Odysseus, and Bellerophon are
some examples.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: U.S.S. Intrepid (NCC-74600),
U.S.S. Voyager (NCC-74656), U.S.S. Pioneer
(NCC-74700)
ENGINES 11
SENSORS 10
Starship
TRAITS: Federation Starship, Intrepid class,
Advanced Warp Drive
SCALE: 4
Systems
COMMS 09
COMPUTERS 11
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING +1
CONN +1
SECURITY
–
Weapons
§ Phaser Arrays
§ Photon Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 3)
Talents
STRUCTURE 08
WEAPONS 08
MEDICINE
–
SCIENCE +1
§ ADVANCED SENSOR SUITES: See page 219.
§ EMERGENCY MEDICAL HOLOGRAM: See page 222.
§ IMPROVED WARP DRIVE: See page 224.
Special Rule
§ LANDING GEAR: See page 196.
THOMAS
MARRONE
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
203
SOVEREIGN
LAUNCH YEAR: 2371
OVERVIEW: The Sovereign class began development
in 2368 after Starfleet Command felt that starships
probing deep space would need to be better equipped
to handle hostile and more technologically advanced
races such as the Borg. The first vessels were launched
in the months before the conflict with the
Klingon Empire began. After the
Dominion War, these
vessels became a
part of Starfleet’s
renewed push
to return to
exploration
and research.
CAPABILITIES: The Sovereign class utilizes variable ge-
ometry warp drive, able to replicate the same qualities of
the Intrepid class’s variable pitch warp nacelles without
the adjustable pylons. The Sovereign class has extensive
laboratories, sensor systems, and subspace transmit-
ters that make it an excellent deep-space explorer. The
design includes significant firepower, including a dedi-
cated quantum torpedo launcher and multiple Type-10a
phaser strips.
REFITS AND VARIANTS: One major variant was designed
and constructed at the Andorian Imperial Ship Yards,
named Sheetar, NCC-73850. The Andorian engineers
who designed her wanted to show a ship of exploration
could also double as a combat vessel when needed.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Strategic and
Diplomatic Operations, Scientific and Survey Operations,
Multirole Explorer. Sovereign-class starships are cut-
ting-edge spaceframes capable of being outfitted for
almost any kind of mission Starfleet can imagine.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: Sovereign-class vessels are
often named after famous ships from Federation history.
Farragut, Wasp, and Shran are all examples.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: U.S.S. Enterprise
(NCC-1701-E), U.S.S. Jaresh-Inyo (NCC-75020),
U.S.S. Okuda (NCC-74107)
ENGINES 10
SENSORS 10
Starship
TRAITS: Federation Starship, Sovereign class
SCALE: 6
Systems
COMMS 10
COMPUTERS 09
Departments
COMMAND +1
ENGINEERING
–
CONN
–
SECURITY +1
Weapons
§ Phaser Arrays
§ Photon Torpedoes
§ Quantum Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 5)
Talents
STRUCTURE 10
WEAPONS 10
MEDICINE
–
SCIENCE +1
§ COMMAND SHIP: See page 220.
§ EMERGENCY MEDICAL HOLOGRAM: See page 222.
§ IMPROVED WARP DRIVE: See page 224.
Special Rule
§ SAUCER SEPARATION: See page 196.
204
CHAPTER 5
THOMAS
MARRONE
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
CONSTITUTION III
LAUNCH YEAR: 2396
OVERVIEW: The first
Constitution III-class ships
entered service in 2396,
after a short development
period. Many of the earliest
vessels of the class had their
construction accelerated by repur-
posing many components from vessels
which had suffered catastrophic damage or were
otherwise being decommissioned. The overall design of
the Constitution III-class, however, owes more to a dif-
ferent legacy. Often referred to as the Neo-Constitution,
the design resembles the Constitution-class ships of
the 23rd century, particularly the refit (or Constitution II)
design which entered service in 2270.
CAPABILITIES: Constitution III-class ships are built
to function as versatile exploratory craft, able to fulfill
a wide range of mission objectives. The design and
construction coincided with new developments in
propulsion technology, which were integrated into the
project development; the result is a class with the high-
est Impulse power-to-geometry ratio in the fleet, and a
top speed of warp 9.99. This makes it ideal for rapidly
responding to emergencies and changing circumstanc-
es in densely populated regions.
REFITS AND VARIANTS: The class is often regarded
more as a refit project than a dedicated class, blurring
the line between creating a new ship and rebuilding an
existing one.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Multirole Explorer,
Strategic and Diplomatic Operations, Crisis and
Emergency Response
NAMING CONVENTIONS: Constitution III-class vessels
are mostly named after previous Starfleet vessels, often
the ones which contributed components to the new
design, such as the Titan.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: U.S.S. Enterprise
(NCC-1701-G, formerly the U.S.S. Titan NCC-80102-A)
ENGINES 11
SENSORS 10
Starship
TRAITS: Federation Starship, Constitution III class,
Legacy Components
SCALE: 5
Systems
COMMS 09
COMPUTERS 10
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING +1
CONN +1
SECURITY
–
Weapons
§ Phaser Arrays
§ Phaser Banks
§ Photon Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 4)
Talents
STRUCTURE 10
WEAPONS 10
MEDICINE
–
SCIENCE +1
§ EXTENSIVE SHUTTLEBAYS: See page 223.
§ IMPROVED IMPULSE DRIVE: See page 223.
§ IMPROVED WARP DRIVE: See page 224.
THOMAS
MARRONE
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
205
NON-STARFLEET SPACEFRAMES
FOLLOWING IS A SELECTION OF SPACEFRAMES USABLE IN CAMPAIGNS FOCUSED ON CIVILIZATIONS OTHER
than the Federation. Other Star Trek Adventures supplements provide additional non-Federation spaceframes.
D7
LAUNCH YEAR: 2257
OVERVIEW: The Klingon fleets of the mid-23rd century
were a scattered collection of individual House fleets
up until the late 2250s. After the ascension of
Chancellor L’Rell of House Mo’Kai,
the Klingon Empire began a
concerted fleet reconstruction
effort, consolidating military
power with the Klingon Defense
Force. Central to this was a ship
design presented by the Chancellor
as a new symbol of Klingon unity: this
design would become known as the D7
Battlecruiser, and it would remain as the cornerstone of
Klingon military might in space for decades to come.
CAPABILITIES: The D7 continues the long design
traditions of the KDF by having a command pod at the
end of a long detachable boom that connects to the
engineering hull. With the primary purpose of the D7
being war, the weapon systems on board had top priori-
ty for the use of internal volume. Two separate photon
torpedo launchers provide the spaceframe’s primary
destructive capabilities.
REFITS AND VARIANTS: Refits for the D7, and its
successor the K’t’inga-class depended greatly on if it
was in service to the KDF or a Great House. One major
development was the reintroduction of cloaking to the
fleet in 2269.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Battlecruiser,
Strategic and Diplomatic Operations, Reserve Fleet.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: Klingon vessels have little in
the way of standard naming conventions. Each House
has its own traditions, as does the KDF.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: I.K.S. Devisor, I.K.S. Gr’oth,
I.K.S Klothos
ENGINES 08
SENSORS 06
Starship
TRAITS: Klingon Starship, D7 class,
Symbol of Klingon Unity
SCALE: 4
Systems
COMMS 07
COMPUTERS 07
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING
–
CONN +1
SECURITY +2
Weapons
§ Disruptor Cannons
§ Phaser Banks
§ Photon Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 3)
Talent
§ RUGGED DESIGN: See page 225.
STRUCTURE 08
WEAPONS 09
MEDICINE
SCIENCE
–
–
206
CHAPTER 5
THOMAS
MARRONE
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
B’REL
LAUNCH YEAR: 2280
OVERVIEW: Before K’tinga discovered
the Romulan treachery with trading faulty
cloaking devices, the engineers in the KDF
began designing a starship capable of using the
faulty cloaking device as is. It was determined that a
bird-of-prey design similar to the Vo’n’talk class would
provide the ideal form for the new vessel, and the first
B’rel launched in 2280.
CAPABILITIES: The forward
command pod contains the
bridge and large cap-
tain’s quarters that
contained an area
dedicated to either a targ-pit
or gagh breeding tub so the command-
ing officer may always have fresh food. The majority of
the small crew lived and worked in the engineering hull.
The power generated from the multistage fusion reac-
tors give the class an impressive sublight acceleration
and a top warp velocity of 9.9 for a short duration. While
the cloak is active, the drain on power is extreme, and
cruising warp velocities are reduced to warp 5.
Starship
TRAITS: Klingon Starship, Bird of Prey, B’rel class,
Agile Raider
SCALE: 3
Systems
COMMS 08
ENGINES 09
STRUCTURE 07
COMPUTERS 07
SENSORS 07
WEAPONS 09
REFITS AND VARIANTS: Engineers continued to im-
prove the cloaking devices through the 23rd and early
24th centuries, allowing for greater warp speeds while
cloaked. Improvements to weapons systems and target-
ing arrays were also prioritized.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Crisis and
Emergency Response, Patrol, Tactical Operations.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: Klingon vessels have little in
the way of standard naming conventions. Each House
has its own traditions, as does the KDF.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: I.K.S. Che’Ta’, I.K.S. Ki’tang,
I.K.S. Rotarran
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING
–
CONN +1
SECURITY +2
Weapons
§ Disruptor Cannons
§ Photon Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 2)
Talents
§ CLOAKING DEVICE: See page 220.
§ FAST TARGETING SYSTEMS: See page 223.
Special Rule
§ LANDING GEAR: See page 196.
MEDICINE
SCIENCE
–
–
THOMAS
MARRONE
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
207
T’LISS
LAUNCH YEAR: 2260
OVERVIEW: For the hundred years
since the Earth-Romulan War, the
Empire had continued to improve
its weapon systems and ship building capabilities.
Covert acquisition of duotronic technology from the
Federation meant a new generation of warbirds would
need to be built. The Romulan Senate gave approval to
the Imperial Navy’s design that harkened back to the
older birds-of-prey used against the Coalition of Planets,
with the first leaving Romulus orbit in late 2265, and first
being seen by the Federation in 2266. The T’Liss class
would continue to be manufactured by the Empire into
the early 24th century.
CAPABILITIES: T’Liss class birds of prey are larger
vessels than their older counterparts. Four decks and
crewed by 170, the vessel is both compact and uses
much of its habitable space efficiently through shared
bunks in officer and enlisted quarters. This highly
compact habitable space is needed as the powerful
plasma torpedo system takes up nearly half the internal
volume of the vessel, with a significant percentage of
the remaining space taken by the ship’s paired matter/
antimatter warp cores and dual fusion reactors. The
ship also used a small and effective cloaking device
that was tied into the vessel’s shield emitters to reduce
power demands.
ENGINES 07
SENSORS 09
REFITS AND VARIANTS: Romulan engineers continual-
ly improved the power output of their matter/antimatter
reactors and reduced the power needs of the plasma
torpedo system to the point that only a single reactor
was needed.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Espionage/
Intelligence, Pathfinder and Reconnaissance, Tactical
Operations, Technical Testbed.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: T’Liss warbirds are named
after powerful senators the navy wished to gain favor
with, and concepts of martial prowess.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: Brak’en, D’tervik, Tovarek
Starship
TRAITS: Romulan Starship, T’Liss class, Bird of Prey,
Experimental
SCALE: 4
Systems
COMMS 06
STRUCTURE 07
COMPUTERS 08
WEAPONS 09
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING +1
MEDICINE
–
CONN +1
SECURITY _+1
SCIENCE
–
Weapons
§ Disruptor Banks
§ Plasma Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 3)
Talent
§ CLOAKING DEVICE: See page 220.
Special Rule
§ PROTOTYPE: The cloaking device employed on this
vessel has some notable limitations. The vessel can-
not travel at warp while cloaked, and the difficulty of
the task roll to activate the cloak increases to 3.
208
CHAPTER 5
THOMAS
MARRONE
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
D’DERIDEX
LAUNCH YEAR: 2350
OVERVIEW: The Romulan Empire kept to itself through
the first half of the 24th century, continually expand-
ing its borders away from the Federation. Using ideas
gleaned from the Klingon Empire’s trade of D7s in the
late 2260s and further native technological ad-
vances, the Empire produced the D’Deridex
class warbird beginning in 2350. The
D’Deridex was successful enough that
the Empire continued to produce
it until the shipyards capable of
building them were destroyed in
the Romulan supernova.
CAPABILITIES: The massive
spaceframe utilizes two different
types of warp coil design. At each
side standard warp nacelles and
coils produce the warp field, but monopolar
subspace field generators installed across the dorsal
and ventral ‘wings’ of the vessel provide stability while
at high warp velocities. This class is the first vessel of its
size to be powered by an artificial quantum singularity,
essentially a subspace compressed mass replicating
a black hole on a small scale. The immense amount
of power this can produce is augmented by standard
fusion reactors and allows the ship to move at speeds of
warp 9.6, and warp 6 even while under cloak.
ENGINES 10
SENSORS 10
REFITS AND VARIANTS: Refits leading into the
Dominion War saw improvements to weapon and sensor
systems. Plans for improving the quantum singularity
reactor were begun in the 2380s but halted with the
destruction of the Romulan star system.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Battlecruiser,
Multirole Explorer, Espionage/Intelligence, Tactical
Operations, Technical Testbed.
NAMING CONVENTIONS: D’Deridex names include
famous starship commanders from Romulan history and
important Imperial worlds.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: Devoras, Haakona, T’Met
Starship
TRAITS: Romulan Starship, D'Deridex class, Imposing
SCALE: 7
Systems
COMMS 08
COMPUTERS 09
Departments
COMMAND +1
ENGINEERING +1
CONN
–
SECURITY +1
Weapons
§ Disruptor Banks
§ Plasma Torpedoes
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 5)
Talent
§ CLOAKING DEVICE: See page 220.
Special Rule
STRUCTURE 11
WEAPONS 09
MEDICINE
–
SCIENCE
–
§ ABUNDANT PERSONNEL: See page 196.
THOMAS
MARRONE
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
209
GALOR
LAUNCH YEAR: 2348
OVERVIEW: Designed and built during the
middle of the long Federation-Cardassian War
of the mid-24th century, the Galor-class cruiser
was meant to be the answer to the effective Starfleet
Ambassador- and Excelsior-class vessels common
along the frontier. Sacrifices in the design had to be
made as the Union lacked the same shipbuilding
facilities as the Federation. These cruisers
were rarely seen alone, and often in
small squadrons of three to five.
Through two wars, the Galor and her
sister classes were the backbone of the
Cardassian Central Command.
CAPABILITIES: Simplicity, ease of maintenance and
construction, and having as small of a logistics need
as possible were all important when the Galor was
designed. These cruisers do not have a torpedo system
installed, as Central Command felt wasting antimatter on
weapons would limit the number of starships they could
produce. Instead, this class utilized two separate energy
weapon systems: phaser arrays spread across the outer
hull and a heavy forward mounted disruptor emitter.
Starship
TRAITS: Cardassian Starship, Galor class
SCALE: 4
Systems
COMMS 08
ENGINES 09
COMPUTERS 08
SENSORS 07
REFITS AND VARIANTS: Central Command issued
orders after the class came into service to improve the
weapon systems with any captured technology. During
the Dominion War, this focus changed to improvements
to the outer hull and warp propulsion.
STRUCTURE 08
WEAPONS 09
Departments
COMMAND +1
CONN
–
ENGINEERING +1
SECURITY +1
MEDICINE
SCIENCE
–
–
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Espionage/
Intelligence, Pathfinder and Reconnaissance, Patrol,
Reserve Fleet, Tactical Operations, Technical Testbed.
Weapons
§ Phaser Banks
§ Disruptor Spinal Lance
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 3)
NAMING CONVENTIONS: Galor class cruisers take
their names from famous war leaders of Cardassia’s past,
important cities on Cardassian Prime, and war heroes.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: Aldara, Prakesh, Reklar
210
CHAPTER 5
THOMAS
MARRONE
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
D’KORA
LAUNCH YEAR: 2350
OVERVIEW: By the mid-24th century, the Ferengi
Alliance had expanded across multiple sectors.
The vast range of societies and species it
encountered meant the Alliance, while
heavily centralized in the Ferenginar
system, had to maintain the ev-
er-growing trade lanes as well
as ensure the markets
would stay linked to
the homeworld,
through free trade
or by force. The Ferengi
Congress of Economic Advisors
levied a tax on all non-Ferengi econom-
ic activity to begin construction of the D’Kora-
class marauder. Ferenginar had no active force
like Starfleet, but the Congress would provide a letter
of marque to any free trader willing to captain and crew
a vessel for the good of the Alliance. D’Kora maraud-
ers quickly became a symbol of the Ferengi Alliance
across the Alpha and Beta Quadrants, feared for their
weaponry and the economic exploitation that would
occur in their presence.
CAPABILITIES: The D’Kora needed a large amount of
its internal volume as mission adaptable space, but the
vast majority of commanding officers used this space as
cargo storage. The standard production vessel included
a unique system tied to the vessel’s warp coils. If these
warp coils were purposely put out of alignment and
charged, the plasma could be discharge as a powerful
electromagnetic pulse, disrupting a hostile ship’s sys-
tems and defensive shielding, and, in a best case, render
the other ship powerless and available for acquisition.
REFITS AND VARIANTS: The Ferengi Alliance stayed
out of the Dominion War except for arms sales to both
sides. Trading in war zones can be hazardous to the
safety of one’s ship, thus the Alliance put forth a rare
regulation to improve the marauder’s shielding, structur-
al integrity fields, and other safety equipment.
SUGGESTED MISSION PROFILES: Espionage/
Intelligence, Pathfinder and Reconnaissance, Tactical
Operations, Technical Testbed.
ENGINES 10
SENSORS 09
Starship
TRAITS: Ferengi Starship, D’Kora class, Marauder, The
Best Latinum Can Buy
SCALE: 5
Systems
COMMS 09
COMPUTERS 08
Departments
COMMAND +1
ENGINEERING +1
CONN
–
SECURITY
–
Weapons
§ Phaser Banks
§ Electromagnetic Cannon
§ Disruptor Banks
§ Tractor Beam (Strength 4)
STRUCTURE 10
WEAPONS 07
MEDICINE
–
SCIENCE +1
Spaceframe Statistics Spaceframe Statistics
NAMING CONVENTIONS: D’Kora-class maruaders take
names from their commanding officers or their loved
ones, or the limited liability companies they are owned by.
NOTABLE EXAMPLES: Damsel, Krayton, Kreechta
THOMAS
MARRONE
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
211
: . CHAPTER 5.4
MISSION PROFILES AND
OTHER ENHANCEMENTS
“It is the unknown that defines our existence.
We are constantly searching, not just
for answers to our questions, but for
new questions. We are explorers.
- Commander Benjamin Sisko
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LT. COMMANDER
BURK VEN JAXA
A ship’s mission profile
is a key part of what
makes one starship
different from another
in the same class. You
and your group have
the opportunity to
customize your vessel
by selecting a mission
profile that suits your
interests and needs.
ALL SPACEFRAMES HAVE A MISSION
profile, which determines the spe-
cialized equipment installed before
venturing into the unknown, the priority
in personnel the ship’s fleet gives the
vessel, and its overall mission goal.
This section details 10 of the
most common mission profiles.
Gamemasters and players are encour-
aged to amend these mission profiles
or create their own based on their
game’s needs and desires. Other Star
Trek Adventures supplements provide
additional mission profiles.
Each mission profile details:
§ SYSTEMS: Each mission profile in-
creases one of the ship’s systems by 1.
§ DEPARTMENTS: Each mission profile
provides the base ratings for the ship’s
departments.
§ TALENTS: Each mission profile lists
a selection of talents related to the
mission profile.
Battlecruiser
Mission Profile
In the mid-23rd century, the lessons of the Earth-
Romulan War are still firmly in the minds of those on the
core Federation worlds, and some vessels are outfit-
ted as vessels of war in case hostilities begin with the
Klingon or Romulan Empires. A similar push to develop
heavy combat vessels arose during the Borg crisis and
Dominion War in the 2360s and 2370s. These vessels are
rare in Starfleet, and those outfitted as such rarely stray
far from important starbases or the worlds they guard.
Systems
INCREASE WEAPONS BY 1
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 01
CONN 02
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE 02
Talents
Select one of the follow-
ing talents:
§ ABLATIVE ARMOR
§ COMMAND SHIP
§ FAST TARGETING
SYSTEMS
§ IMPROVED
DAMAGE CONTROL
§ RAPID FIRE
TORPEDO
LAUNCHER
212
CHAPTER 5
Crisis and Emergency Response
Mission Profile
These vessels are equipped to respond quickly to a cri-
sis, whatever it may be. Normally capable of supporting
expansive shuttlebays, they can deploy large quantities
of personnel or cargo to, or evacuate large populations
from, disaster areas. Such vessels also serve as hospital
ships and troop transport during conflicts.
Systems
INCREASE SENSORS BY 1
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 01
CONN 02
SECURITY 02
Talents
Select one of the following talents:
§ ADVANCED SICKBAY
§ EMERGENCY MEDICAL HOLOGRAM
§ EXTENSIVE SHUTTLEBAYS
§ MODULAR LABORATORIES
MEDICINE 03
SCIENCE 02
Espionage / Intelligence
Mission Profile
Vessels equipped for espionage are rare in active
Starfleet service, but are used by member cultures
within the Federation, and by other polities such as
the Romulan Empire and Cardassian Union, whose
intelligence agencies often employ dedicated vessels
(whether or not they are legally permitted to), and in
many cultures, intelligence agencies may commandeer
existing vessels for their needs. These vessels are
often equipped with highly sensitive monitoring de-
vices, enhanced sensors, and stealth systems (though
stopping short of actual cloaking devices for Starfleet
vessels). These vessels range close to—and some-
times beyond—foreign borders. Serving on these ships
is often a dangerous and thankless proposition.
Systems
INCREASE SENSORS BY 1
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 01
CONN 02
SECURITY 03
Talents
Select one of the following talents:
§ ELECTRONIC WARFARE SYSTEMS
§ HIGH-RESOLUTION SENSORS
§ IMPROVED REACTION CONTROL SYSTEM
§ REDUCED SENSOR SILHOUETTE
MEDICINE 01
SCIENCE 03
Flagship
Mission Profile
Flagships are a specialized form of command ship, with
a dedicated flag bridge or strategic operations center
within the vessel. These ships can act as a mobile fleet
headquarters, with systems and personnel dedicated to
ensuring the operations of whole fleets, or even serv-
ing as a vessel for the continuity of command should
disaster strike.
Systems
INCREASE COMMS BY 1
Departments
COMMAND 03
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 01
CONN 01
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE 02
Talents
Select one of the following talents:
§ COMMAND SHIP
§ DEDICATED SUBSPACE TRANSCEIVER ARRAY
§ DIPLOMATIC SUITES
§ REDUNDANT SYSTEMS (COMMUNICATIONS)
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
213
Multirole Explorer
Mission Profile
Many of Starfleet’s most renowned and revered vessels
have been jack-of-all-trades ships, rather than special-
ized for a single type of mission. This versatility allowed
the likes of Jonathan Archer, Christopher Pike, James
Kirk, and Jean-Luc Picard to explore strange new worlds,
seek out new life and new civilizations, and boldly go
where no one has gone before.
Systems
INCREASE ANY ONE SYSTEM BY 1
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 02
CONN 02
SECURITY 02
Talents
Select one of the following talents:
§ IMPROVED HULL INTEGRITY
§ IMPROVED POWER SYSTEMS
§ REDUNDANT SYSTEMS
§ RUGGED DESIGN
§ SECONDARY REACTORS
MEDICINE 02
SCIENCE 02
Pathfinder and Reconnaissance Operations
Mission Profile
Long-range missions often employ the most advanced
stellar cartography and astrometric facilities, allowing
them to chart and navigate unknown regions of space
more effectively, especially where spatial distortions
make those regions difficult to navigate. These vessels
are relied upon for extended exploratory missions, intel-
ligence-gathering military operations, and risky “path-
finder” operations into the unknown.
Systems
INCREASE ENGINES BY 1
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 02
CONN 03
SECURITY 02
Talents
Select one of the following talents:
§ IMPROVED REACTION CONTROL SYSTEM
§ IMPROVED WARP DRIVE
§ RUGGED DESIGN
§ HIGH-RESOLUTION SENSORS
MEDICINE 01
SCIENCE 02
Patrol
Mission Profile
Patrol vessels are dedicated to acting as peacekeepers
in regions of space where hostility is not only possible,
but likely. These vessels tend to operate along borders
with other polities, and act as picket vessels during
fleet actions. In times of peace, patrol vessels can be
assigned to survey missions, or operate patrols against
pirates, smugglers, and similar dangers.
Systems
INCREASE SENSORS BY 1
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING 01
CONN 03
SECURITY 03
Talents
Select one of the following talents:
§ FAST TARGETING SYSTEMS
§ HIGH-RESOLUTION SENSORS
§ IMPROVED POWER SYSTEMS
MEDICINE 02
SCIENCE 02
214
CHAPTER 5
Scientific and Survey Operations
Mission Profile
Starfleet’s mission of exploration and discovery means
that it employs many vessels for purely scientific mis-
sions, studying unknown phenomena, or supporting
ongoing research. While most Federation starships are
expected to have at least some capacity for scientific
endeavor, some vessels are outfitted specifically for
such missions.
Systems
INCREASE COMPUTERS BY 1
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 03
CONN 01
SECURITY 01
Talents
Select one of the following talents:
§ ADVANCED RESEARCH FACILITIES
§ ADVANCED SENSOR SUITES
§ HIGH-RESOLUTION SENSORS
§ MODULAR LABORATORIES
Strategic and Diplomatic Operations
Mission Profile
Vessels equipped for this profile are often placed under
the command of flag officers and used as the heart of
squadrons, battlegroups, and even whole fleets. These
ships, and the prestige and standing that accompanies
them, are also used for major diplomatic undertakings
where they can serve as mobile embassies and repre-
sent the best of the Federation.
Systems
INCREASE COMMUNICATIONS BY 1
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 01
CONN 02
SECURITY 02
Talents
Select one of the following talents:
§ COMMAND SHIP
§ DIPLOMATIC SUITES
§ ELECTRONIC WARFARE SYSTEMS
§ EXTENSIVE SHUTTLEBAYS
Tactical Operations
Mission Profile
While Starfleet is not a military, the defense of the
Federation is one of Starfleet’s responsibilities, and
Starfleet has been required to prepare for war on nu-
merous occasions. Thus, many ships are equipped for
peacekeeping and military actions, though the number
of vessels outfitted in this manner varies depending on
the politics of the day.
Systems
INCREASE WEAPONS BY 1
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 02
CONN 02
SECURITY 03
Talents
Select one of the following talents:
§ ABLATIVE ARMOR
§ FAST TARGETING SYSTEMS
§ IMPROVED DAMAGE CONTROL
§ IMPROVED IMPULSE DRIVE
MEDICINE 02
SCIENCE 03
MEDICINE 02
SCIENCE 03
MEDICINE 02
SCIENCE 01
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
215
SERVICE RECORD
A STARSHIP’S SERVICE RECORD (KNOWN BY THE
Klingons as a ship’s Record of Battle, and other names
by other spacefaring civilizations) may be selected to
represent key elements of a starship’s life of service.
Selecting a service record provides an additional trait
for the ship to reflect her life of service, and provides the
following modest benefits:
§ TRAIT: The ship receives an additional trait matching
the title of the service record.
§ SPECIAL RULE: Each service record adds an addi-
tional special rule to the ship.
Service records are not required for play; they are an
optional element to add flavor and roleplaying potential.
Players should work with their gamemaster to create al-
ternative service records as desired. Ships may only have
one service record and they cannot be swapped out.
: . Aging Relic
The ship has been in service for decades, and has been
home to many crews. Only the longest-serving crew are
likely to remember when it was new.
LARGER CREW: The ship’s Crew Support is increased
by 1.
: . Dependable
Workhorse
The ship is dependable, with a solid record of successful
missions and accomplishments. While overshadowed by
more famous ships, this vessel is nevertheless a main-
stay of the fleet, with a competent, dedicated crew.
RELIABLE: Whenever the ship rolls to assist a task at-
tempt, the group may spend 1 Momentum to ignore any
complications rolled on the ship’s die.
: . Legendary
This ship is famous, having been at the center of one or
more major events that shaped the history and politics
of one or more civilizations. This comes with great pres-
tige for those involved.
PRESTIGIOUS POSTING: When a new supporting char-
acter is first introduced, apply a single improvement to
them immediately, like a milestone (page 167).
: . Hope Ship
This vessel’s service has been spent responding to
distress calls and disasters, warping to the rescue of
those in danger or subjected to great hardship. The
ship is heavily refitted for disaster relief, evacuation, and
medical catastrophes, and the crew often have addition-
al emergency medical training.
MISSION OF MERCY: The first time in a scene when
an enemy makes an attack against this ship, the gam-
emaster must spend 1 Threat. The hope ship must add 1
Threat the first time in any scene it makes an attack.
: . Prototype
The ship is brand new, first of her class, and laden with
the newest technologies, assembled to be tested and
studied. There are potentially a whole host of unknown
problems and challenges to face, as novel systems clash
or malfunction as they interact in unexpected ways.
EXPERIMENTAL VESSEL: When the ship is creat-
ed, apply two additional refits to the ship. In addition,
whenever the ship assists a task attempt, the ship’s die
increases its complication range by 2 (to 18–20). A mile-
stone refit (see page 167) can remove this complication
range increase, representing the ship’s crew working out
the problems in the prototype design.
: . Survivor of X
NOTE: Replace X with the name of a battle or war
This ship was involved in some of the fiercest battles,
surviving the fighting, though not without scars. The
crew is battle-hardened and prepared for anything.
READY FOR BATTLE: During the first round of ship
combat, the gamemaster must spend 1 additional
Threat to allow an enemy ship to take the first turn.
UTOPIA PLANITIA
STARFLEET YARDS
SOL SYSTEM
216
CHAPTER 5
REFITS
STARSHIPS RECEIVE REFITS THROUGHOUT THE
spaceframe’s service life. Refits represent significant
overhauls performed at starbases and spacedocks, tak-
ing from days to months of work. In some cases, ships
that have served for decades may receive substantial
overhauls, taking a year or more to complete. Whatever
the nature of these upgrades, older vessels will have
received many refits.
A ship receives one refit for every 10 full years of space-
frame service. Each refit increases one of the ship’s
systems by 1. No system may be refit more than twice
in a ship’s lifetime. No system may be raised above 12
through refits.
: . Refit Selection
D20 REFIT
1–3 Communications
4–6 Computers
7–9 Engines
10–12 Sensors
13–15 Structure
16–18 Weapons
19–20 Roll Again or Select
For each refit your ship undergoes, roll on the Refit
Selection table or work with your group to choose a
system to refit.
EXAMPLE: The group creates a new Constitution-
class vessel, the U.S.S. Challenger. Their year of play
is 2273. With the Constitution class originally rolling
out in 2243, the players select three refits. They
decide to add 1 each to Communications, Computers,
and Sensors to help focus the Challenger and crew
on deep space scientific exploration.
MARC BELL
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
217
: . CHAPTER 5.5
STARSHIP TALENTS
“Well, we’re Starfleet. Figuring out impossible
problems is what we do, so let’s just keep
calm and, uh, try to think of a solution.
- Captain Carol Freeman
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LT. COMMANDER
BURK VEN JAXA
There’s more to a
starship than its plating,
weapons, engines, and
optical data networks.
Each spaceframe class
and individual ship
within each class has
specific capabilities
and functions installed
to effectively support
her mission and help
the crew succeed. This
chapter discusses those
particular ship talents.
WHILE EACH VESSEL WITHIN A GIVEN
starship class is created from the same
design, individual ships within a class
can vary widely based on their talents.
These talents provide advantages
during certain circumstances and can
represent anything from specialized
technologies to modified construction
elements.
Every starship begins play with a num-
ber of talents equal to its Scale, some of
which are provided by the ship’s class
and its mission profile. Talents are sep-
arate from any special rules specific to
the vessel (see page 196).
Some talents have one or more specific
requirements. These are conditions
that must be fulfilled before the talent
can be selected. Some of these require-
ments are a particular year, where the
talent represents a specific technology
introduced in that year—these talents
cannot be taken if the date of the game
is prior to that year, as the technology
hasn’t been invented yet (though the
gamemaster may make exceptions).
Most talents have a condition and a
benefit. The condition is the circum-
stances under which the talent can be
used, and the benefit is what the ship
gains from meeting that condition. Some
of these conditions are mechanical are
mechanical in nature, while othersmay
be more narrative in function.
expressly noted. If two different talents
have benefits which can be combined,
their benefits stack.
: . Ablative Armor
REQUIREMENT: 2368 onwards
The vessel’s hull plating has an addition-
al ablative layer that disintegrates slowly
under extreme temperatures. Increase
the ship's Resistance by 2.
: . Adaptable
Energy Weapons
REQUIREMENT: 24th century or later
When you select this talent, select one
of the energy weapons on your ship, and
choose a different energy weapon type
(the emitter remains unchanged). When
you make an attack using that energy
weapon, you may use the alternate
energy weapon type for the attack, but
the complication range of that attack is
increased by 1.
You may select this talent multiple times,
choosing a different energy weapon
type each time.
None of these talents may be select-
ed more than once, unless otherwise
: . Adaptive Shield
Modulator
REQUIREMENT: 24th century or later
When the Modulate Shields action is
taken, the ship’s Resistance is increased
by a further +1 by that action. Further,
the ship may have its shields raised
when operating in silent running (see
sidebar opposite).
218
CHAPTER 5
: . Advanced Emergency
Crew Holograms
REQUIREMENT: 2380 onward
The ship has several holographic supporting characters
(which should be pregenerated, see page 146) equal
to half the ship’s Computers score (round up); their
appearance and personality are determined when the
ship is created, though the supporting characters have a
species trait of Hologram. These can be activated or de-
activated as a minor action, and they do not require any
Crew Support to appear. They cannot operate outside
of the ship, and they do not improve when introduced
in subsequent adventures. However, if any character
advances are used to improve these supporting charac-
ters, all the supporting characters granted by this talent
receive the advance.
: . Advanced Medical
Ward / Sickbay
REQUIREMENT: Medicine 3+
The ship gains the Advanced Medical Ward or
Advanced Sickbay trait, which applies to all tasks relat-
ed to medicine and biology performed within the ward
or sickbay, and stacks with the normal benefits of being
in sickbay (see page 190). This trait is lost if the ship’s
Computers system is disabled. In addition, the ship
receives one additional Crew Support, which may only
be used to introduce supporting characters from the
Medical department.
: . Advanced Research
Facilities
REQUIREMENT: Science 3+
The vessel is equipped with additional laboratories
and long-term research facilities. Whenever a char-
acter aboard the ship succeeds at a task to perform
research, and they are assisted by the ship’s Computers
+ Science, they may ask two additional questions, as if
they had spent Momentum to Obtain Information.
: . Advanced Sensor
Suites
Whenever a character performs a task roll assisted by
the ship’s Sensors, the ship may roll 2d20 for assistance
rather than only one (if Reserve Power is rerouted to
Sensors, one of these dice is set to a 1). This talent can-
not be used if the ship is suffering one or more breaches
to Sensors.
 Silent Running
A ship may operate on “silent running”; while doing so,
the ship’s systems are reduced to a minimum: the ship
cannot have shields or weapons armed and may not
move by any means other than maneuvering thrusters.
Further, as active sensors are shut down, the ship relies
only on passive sensors, adding 1 to the Difficulty of any
tasks assisted by the ship’s Sensors systems. While “silent
running”, the ship cannot be detected unless it is at Close
range or the zone it is in has been actively scanned.
A vessel which moves using Impulse or Warp, or which
raises shields, arms weapons, or takes the Reroute
Power action immediately stops “silent running”.
: . Advanced Shields
The ship’s shields are state-of-the-art, using the latest
developments. The ship's maximum shield capacity is
increased by 5.
: . Advanced
Transporters
REQUIREMENT: 24th century or later, Science 4+
When you use the transporters, if you have rerouted
Reserve Power to the ship’s Sensors, select one trait in
play that is affecting the transporter’s task. If the trait
is increasing the task’s Difficulty, ignore the effects of
that trait. If the trait instead makes the transporter’s task
impossible, change that effect to instead increase the
Difficulty by 1.
: . Annular Confinement
Jacketing
REQUIREMENT: 23rd century or later
The ship may make an attack with its energy weapons
while at warp; however, the range of these attacks is
limited to Close range, and the Difficulty for the attack is
increased by 1.
: . Automated Defenses
REQUIREMENT: 23rd century or later, Security 3+
At the end of a round, if no attacks were made using the
ship’s weapons, the ship may make an energy weapon
attack using its Weapons + Security (without assis-
tance) against a target within Close range. Momentum
may be used and generated as normal for this attack.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
219
: . Automatic Return
REQUIREMENT: 23rd century or later
The ship’s computer is programmed to recognize a star-
base, colony, or some other location as its home base.
The shuttles on board have the same programming
and recognize the ship as their home base. If the ship’s
Computers system goes for 10 days without commands
from the crew, it will automatically pilot the ship back to
the home base at maximum impulse.
: . Backup EPS Conduits
When the ship is shaken and loses Reserve Power, roll
1d20; if you roll equal to or under your ship’s Structure,
regain Reserve Power.
: . Captain’s Yacht
The vessel has a single additional support craft, normal-
ly mounted in a dedicated port under the saucer of the
ship. These craft, larger than most shuttles, are often
used for diplomatic missions and special excursions
special excursions.
The ship has one additional small craft, which does not
count against the ship’s small craft capacity and does
not launch from the shuttlebay. The captain’s yacht
statistics can be found on page 235.
: . Cloaking Device
REQUIREMENT: Klingon or Romulan ship, or gamemas-
ter’s discretion
Activating the device is a major action which requires
Reserve Power, and which requires a Control +
Engineering task with a Difficulty of 2, assisted by the
ship’s Engines + Security. This is operated from the
ship’s Tactical position. If successful, the vessel gains the
Cloaked trait. While cloaked, the vessel cannot attempt
any attacks, nor can it be the target of an attack unless
the attacker has found some way of detecting the cloaked
vessel. While cloaked, a vessel’s shields are down.
Deactivating the cloaking device requires a minor action.
: . Command Ship
REQUIREMENT: Command 3+
When a character on the ship succeeds at a Command
task to create a trait, they may always be assisted by the
ship’s Communications + Command, and they may con-
fer the trait to allied ships, landing parties, or away teams
with whom the ship maintains a communication link.
220
CHAPTER 5
 Dedicated
Auxiliary Craft
The captain’s yacht is one of the more common forms
of specialized support craft used by Starfleet, but it is
far from the only type. Starfleet and other fleets have
experimented with other forms of specialized auxiliary
craft, with examples including the Aeroshuttle designed
alongside the Intrepid-class starship, and the Waverider
designed to function with the Nova-class. For these
craft, work with your gamemaster to modify the cap-
tain’s yacht profile to suit the desired purpose.
 Cloaking Devices
and Politics
The technology of cloaking devices has existed in some
form or another since at least the 22nd century; the
Klingons and the Romulans had stable, functional cloak-
ing by the mid-23rd century. However, the Federation
rarely employed cloaking prior to the 24th century, and
was legally barred from developing or operating cloaking
technology under the Treaty of Algeron in 2311.
If you want to include a cloaking device on your ship,
discuss the matter with your gamemaster to determine
whether such technology is fitting or appropriate for
your game; a ship with an illegal cloak could be inter-
esting in some games, but unsuitable in others. Further,
if a cloaking device has a different technological base
than the rest of the ship, integrating it could produce all
manner of quirks, oddities, or complications.
: . Dedicated
Personnel (X)
Choose a single department. The ship gains 2 additional
Crew Support, which may only be used to establish sup-
porting characters who are part of that department.
: . Dedicated Subspace
Transceiver Array
This talent enhances the vessel’s communication range
and clarity, even at warp. Any tasks involving sending,
receiving, or intercepting subspace or standard commu-
nications may re-roll the ship’s assistance dice as long
as the ship’s Communications system is not disabled.
: . Deluxe Galley
REQUIREMENT: Command 3+
The ship’s mess hall is equipped with top-of-the-line
food preparation systems as well as vast stores of
non-replicated food.
Once per adventure, you may create a Fine Dining trait
for free when the ship is visited by a VIP, diplomat, or
other important guest. When a character attempts a task
using Presence and/or Command and benefits from this
trait, the character receives 1 bonus Momentum, which
may not be saved.
EREN ARIK
: . Diplomatic Suites
The ship has numerous high-quality staterooms for host-
ing VIPs, as well as briefing rooms and other facilities
that allow the ship to serve as a neutral ground for diplo-
matic summits, trade negotiations, and similar functions,
including making environmental adjustments to make
alien diplomats more comfortable.
When hosting negotiations, members of the crew may
be assisted by the ship’s Computers + Command or
Structure + Command.
: . Dual Environment
REQUIREMENT: 24th century or later
The ship is outfitted with redundant system rooms that
can be filled with gases or liquids that allow crew mem-
bers requiring different atmospheric conditions to work
side by side with the rest of the crew. A character who is
in a redundant system room may assist others in the con-
nected system room as if they were in the same room.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
221
: . Electronic Warfare
Systems
Whenever a character at the communications station on
the ship creates a trait to represent intercepting enemy
communications, or to create interference or jamming
signals which would hinder enemy communications,
they may spend 1 Momentum to increase the Potency of
that trait by one step, or to affect a second enemy vessel.
: . Emergency Medical
Hologram (EMH)
REQUIREMENT: 2371–2380
The ship has one additional supporting character, an
Emergency Medical Hologram (EMH), using the attrib-
utes, departments, and so forth as shown in the sidebar,
which does not cost any Crew Support to introduce, and
which does not automatically improve when introduced.
This character can only go to locations on the ship
which are equipped with holo-emitters.
After 2380, this talent is obsolete, as all Starfleet vessels
are outfitted with an EMH.
SUBSEQUENT EMH MODELS
For every three years after 2371, the current model of
EMH is replaced by a newer model (Mark II in 2374, Mark
III in 2377, and Mark IV in 2380). After 2380, this talent is
replaced by Advanced Emergency Crew Holograms.
Apply the following cumulative changes to these models:
§ MARK II: +1 Presence
§ MARK III: +1 Medicine
§ MARK IV: Add the Technical Expertise talent (page
150)
: . Expanded Emergency
Medical Facilities
Whenever a character attempts a task to identify specific
illnesses or injuries, or to determine the severity of a
patient’s condition, they may diagnose a number of pa-
tients equal to the ship’s Medical rating. If the character
also has the Triage talent, they may diagnose two addi-
tional patients by spending 1 Momentum (Repeatable).
During an extended task to process and treat many sick
or injured patients, a character aboard the ship increas-
es their Impact by 1.
222
CHAPTER 5
Emergency Medical
Hologram
Minor NPC
This profile represents a typical Mark I Emergency
Medical Hologram, an acerbic and ill-tempered program
often disliked by the crews serving alongside them.
FOCUSES: Emergency Medicine, Infectious Diseases,
Surgery, Xenobiology
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 10
PRESENCE 07
DARING 09
REASON 10
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 04
CONN 02
SECURITY 01
SCIENCE 04
Attacks
§ None
Talents
§ FIRST RESPONSE: See page 165.
§ TRIAGE: See page 165.
FITNESS 08
INSIGHT 08
: . Expanded Munitions
The ship may add one weapon to its profile: either an
energy weapon (choose an energy type and a delivery
mechanism) or a torpedo type. This talent is often taken
by Starfleet vessels to add Quantum Torpedoes to a
ship’s arsenal.
This talent may be taken multiple times, adding a differ-
ent weapon each time.
: . Expansive
Department (X)
REQUIREMENT: A department with a score of 5
When you select this talent, select a single department
on the ship with a score of 5. Whenever a ship assists a
task roll using the chosen department, you may ignore
a complication by spending 1 Momentum (Immediate,
Repeatable).
: . Extensive Automation
REQUIREMENT: Computer system of 10+
The ship has been configured to operate on a much
smaller crew, relying on automation to handle tasks
normally performed by personnel. Even purely physical
tasks can be replaced by automation, using compact
technical drones, such as the DOT-7 present on some
23rd century Starfleet vessels, like the U.S.S. Discovery.
The ship’s Crew Support is reduced to half its normal
value (rounded up). However, the ship may attempt
tasks by itself, and may even take a turn during a combat
round by itself. If it does so, add 1 Threat before a task
is attempted, and make the roll using the ship’s systems
and departments.
: . Extensive Medical
Laboratories
REQUIREMENT: Medicine 4+
While in sickbay, when an extended task is attempted
to study an unknown medical condition, or to develop a
treatment for one, the characters performing the extend-
ed task each adds 1 to their Impact (page 271).
: . Extensive Shuttlebays
The vessel’s shuttlebays are large, well-supplied, and
able to support a larger number of active shuttle mis-
sions simultaneously. The ship’s Small Craft Readiness
is increased by an amount equal to the ship’s Scale
minus 1, and it may carry up to two Scale 2 small craft
(typically runabouts). Starships that do not have this
talent may carry Scale 1 small craft only.
: . Fast Targeting
Systems
REQUIREMENT: Security 3+
When you use the Targeting Solution minor action, you
may gain both benefits: re-roll a d20 on the next attack
and choose the system hit by the attack.
: . High-Intensity
Energy Weapons
REQUIREMENT: Weapons 10+
If Reserve Power is rerouted to Weapons, the next attack
using one of the ship’s energy weapons increases
Damage by 2.
: . High-Power
Tractor Beam
The ship’s tractor beam systems channel far greater
quantities of power and exert much more force on the tar-
get. Increase the strength of the ship’s tractor beam by 2.
: . High-Resolution
Sensors
The vessel’s sensors can gain large amounts of accurate
data, though they are extremely sensitive. While the
vessel is not in combat, any successful task assisted by
the ship’s Sensors gains 1 bonus Momentum. Bonus
Momentum may not be saved.
: . Improved Damage
Control
When a character takes the Damage Control action
aboard the ship, they may re-roll a single d20. When at-
tempting an extended task related to repairing the ship,
anyone working on that extended task adds 1 to their
Impact (page 271).
: . Improved Hull
Integrity
The ship’s hull has been reinforced to better endure stress
and damage. The ship’s Resistance is increased by 1.
: . Improved Impulse Drive
When a character uses the Impulse minor action while
on this ship, they may spend 2 Momentum to increase
the Difficulty of attacks against the ship by +1 until the
start of that character’s next turn, due to the ship’s rapid
acceleration.
: . Improved Power
Systems
When a character attempts the Regain Power action,
the Difficulty is reduced by 1, to a minimum of 1, and you
may spend 1 Momentum (Immediate) to ignore compli-
cations suffered on that task roll.
: . Improved Probe Bay
When a character uses the Launch Probe minor action,
the probe may be launched to a location up to five zones
away. In addition, the probes are no longer destroyed if
they take any damage; instead, each probe has 3 Shield
points, and are destroyed if they take one breach.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
223
TOBIAS RICHTER
: . Improved Reaction
Control System
Whenever the ship attempts to move through difficult
terrain, reduce the Momentum cost of the difficult ter-
rain by 1, to a minimum of 0.
: . Improved Shield
Recharge
REQUIREMENT: Security 3+
Whenever the Regenerate Shields action is success-
ful, the ship regains shields equal to the character’s
Engineering department rating +1, plus 3 more by
spending 1 Momentum (Repeatable), instead of the
normal amount.
: . Improved Warp Drive
Whenever the ship takes the Warp major action, roll a
d20; if you roll equal to or under the ship’s Engines, you
do not spend Reserve Power for the ship.
224
CHAPTER 5
: . Modular Laboratories
REQUIREMENT: Science 2+
The opportunity cost of establishing a science lab
(page 189) is reduced to 0 for the first laboratory estab-
lished, and to 1 for the second.
: . Point Defense System
REQUIREMENT: Security 3+
The ship is equipped with a system of small energy
weapon emitters that operates independently from
the main weapons systems. When a torpedo targets
the ship, these emitters start firing in the direction the
torpedo is traveling from, potentially destroying it before
it impacts the shields or the ship’s hull.
This system does not function while the ship is travelling
at warp. The ship is considered to have Cover against
torpedo attacks, increasing the Difficulty of the attack by
1. This talent stops functioning if the ship has suffered
one or more breaches to the Weapons system.
: . Rapid-Fire Torpedo
Launcher
The vessel’s torpedo launchers have been designed
to allow the ship to fire multiple torpedoes much more
quickly and accurately. When the ship fires a torpedo
salvo (page 229), the character at Tactical may re-roll a
d20 on the Attack. Also, the weapon’s Damage rating is
increased by 1.
: . Reduced Sensor
Silhouette
Through a combination of advanced alloys, EM shield-
ing, and electronic countermeasures, the starship is
difficult to detect via electromagnetic radiation and
subspace sensors. Tasks attempting to scan or detect
the vessel increase in Difficulty by 1.
: . Redundant Systems (X)
Select a single system when this talent is chosen. When
that system suffers a breach, the crew may choose to
activate this talent in response; doing so immediately
patches the breach inflicted. These redundant systems
may only be activated once per adventure.
: . Rugged Design
Whenever a task roll is attempted to patch or repair a
breach, a d20 may be re-rolled. Further, if the task is
successful, the crew may spend Momentum to patch a
second breach; this will cost 2 Momentum, +1 per addi-
tional step of Potency on that second breach.
seal seal
: . Secondary Reactors
The ship has additional impulse and fusion reactors
which allow the ship to generate far greater quantities
of energy. Once per scene, when you take the Reroute
Power action, you may spend 2 Momentum (Immediate)
to immediately regain the use of Reserve Power.
: . Siphoning Shields
When the ship is hit by an energy weapon, after the at-
tack is resolved, you may add 2 Threat to restore Shields
equal to the ship’s Security department.
: . Sophisticated
Astrometrics Facilities
When a character in the stellar cartography laboratory
or at navigation attempts a task to plot a course or map
a large region of space, they may re-roll a d20. Further, if
such a task creates a trait to represent a planned course
or knowledge about the region, this trait automatically
increases its Potency by one step.
: . Transport Inhibitors
While transporter inhibitors are active on the ship,
nobody may transport onto or off the ship: all tasks to
transport people or materials to or from the ship imme-
diately fail. This necessarily means that the ship’s own
transporters are shut down, as they will not function
alongside the inhibitors.
: . Variable Geometry
Warp Field
A ship with a variable geometry warp field can adjust its
subspace field in highly turbulent spacetime and can
continue to provide propulsive force even then. When
you attempt a task to go to warp, you may select one trait
in play which affects the task roll, and ignore its effects.
: . Wormhole Relay
System
REQUIREMENT: 2371 or later
The ship has an additional sensor system outfitted with
high-energy transceivers, verteron sensors, and neutrino
sensors. These sensors, combined with field-generation
devices, allow the ship to send and receive data streams
through wormholes. The Difficulty of all Science tasks to
send or receive data through a wormhole is reduced by
2, to a minimum of 0.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
225
: . CHAPTER 5.6
STARSHIP WEAPONRY
“That’s why I asked for the Defiant. She may
have flaws, but she has teeth, and I want
the Dominion to know that we can and will
defend ourselves if necessary.
- Commander Benjamin Sisko
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LT. COMMANDER
BURK VEN JAXA
While Starfleet is an
exploratory organization,
we learned early on
there are a wide variety
of beings out there,
and some of them
would rather fight than
talk. Having defensive
systems and effective
weapons installed
on vessels is an
unfortunate necessity in
our crowded corner of
the Galaxy.
STAR TREK ADVENTURES CLASSIFIES
ship and station weapons into two basic
categories: energy weapons and torpe-
does. Each weapon type has different
rules and is useful in different situations.
Knowing which weapon to use can
make or break a starship conflict, and
this is the mark of a great security or
weapons officer.
Starship weapons have the following
categories:
§ TYPE: This will list Energy or Torpedo.
§ RANGE: This will list one of Close,
Medium, or Long. Attacks cannot
be made at any distance beyond the
weapon’s listed range category.
§ DAMAGE: The base amount of dam-
age inflicted when making an attack.
A weapon’s Damage rating gains a
bonus from the ship’s Weapons rat-
ing, as noted in the Damage Bonus
from Weapon Rating table.
EXAMPLE: The U.S.S. Defiant
was designed to be a warship; its
Weapons system rating of 13 gives
each of its weapon systems a +4
bonus to damage.
: . Damage Bonus from
Weapons Rating
WEAPONS RATING DAMAGE
6 or Lower +0
7–8 +1
9–10 +2
11–12 +3
13+ +4
§ QUALITIES: Any other special rules
or effects that usually apply to the
weapon’s use. The following are the
most common weapon qualities:
§ AREA: This weapon impacts a
wider area and can affect sev-
eral targets at once. When you
succeed at an attack, additional
targets in the same zone may be
hit by spending 1 Momentum
for each additional target
(Repeatable). This attack may
Succeed at Cost (see page 259).
§ CALIBRATION: This weapon
needs to be calibrated before
firing. The weapon cannot be fired
unless a Prepare minor action is
performed before the Attack major
action in the same turn.
226
CHAPTER 5
§ CUMBERSOME: This weapon is difficult to bring
to bear against a target, increasing the Difficulty
of an attack made using it by 1. If this weapon is a
torpedo, it cannot be fired as part of a salvo (see
page 229 for more information on salvos).
§ DAMPENING: This attack drains the target’s
reserve power, causing widespread disruption. If
the target has Reserve Power available, it loses
Reserve Power.
§ DEPLETING: This attack strips away the protec-
tive layers of deflector shields. The attack cannot
cause the ship to be shaken, but the Momentum
cost to increase damage is reduced to 1.
§ DEVASTATING: Tasks to repair breaches caused
by this weapon increase in Difficulty by 1.
§ HIDDEN X: This weapon system is concealed from
scans. When the weapon is hidden, it cannot be
detected unless a specific scan is attempted; this
scan is a task with a Difficulty of X.
§ HIGH YIELD: This weapon inflicts massive dam-
age to enemy vessels. If the attack inflicts one or
more breaches to a system, it inflicts one addi-
tional breach (or steps up the Potency of a breach
inflicted by 1—attacker’s choice).
ENERGY WEAPONS
ENERGY WEAPONS PROJECT BEAMS OR PULSES OF
coherent energy, plasma, or energized particles and
usually can be fired at impulse speeds only.
Attacks using energy weapons have a base Difficulty of
2. Energy weapon damage is determined by its delivery
system plus a bonus from its Weapons system rating
(see previous page). Energy weapons may also have
Weapon Qualities, which modify how the damage
affects an impacted target.
: . Types of Energy
Weapon
Over the centuries, weapons have been developed and
refined which employ different forms of energy with
different effects and destructive capabilities. Starfleet
vessels are typically equipped with phasers, though
earlier vessels used more primitive plasma and phase
§ INTENSE: When making an attack with this weap-
on, you may increase the damage by 1 by spending
1 Momentum, rather than 2. This is Repeatable.
§ JAMMING: This weapon sends out a scattering
field, disrupting the target’s sensors or communi-
cations systems. Until the end of the current round,
the target increases the Difficulty for all tasks
assisted by Communications and Sensors by 1.
§ PERSISTENT: When this weapon hits, you may
spend 1–3 Momentum. At the end of each round,
the target suffers half the weapon’s damage rating
(round up) again. This effect lasts for a number of
rounds equal to the Momentum spent.
§ PIERCING: The weapon is effective at cutting
through layers of protection. When this weapon
makes an attack, any Resistance the target has is
ignored.
§ SLOWING: Until the end of the current round,
characters aboard the target vessel cannot use the
Keep the Initiative Momentum spend.
§ SPREAD: Attacks with this weapon reduce the
cost of the Devastating Attack Momentum spend
to 1. This is Repeatable.
§ VERSATILE X: If an attack with this weapon is
successful, it gains X points of bonus Momentum.
Bonus Momentum cannot be saved.
weapons. Disruptors are common in Klingon and
Romulan warship designs, and also used by Cardassians
and other civilizations.
The Types of Energy Weapons table details different
types of energy weapons installed on starships and
space stations across the Galaxy, and lists which quali-
ties each weapon possesses.
: . Energy Weapon
Delivery Systems
An important part of energy weapon systems is how the
energy is focused and delivered to a target. Each type
of weapon system modifies the attack in some way and
defines the range and damage output of the weapon. All
damage ratings are increased by a bonus from the ship’s
Weapons rating (see previous page).
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
227
: . Types of Energy Weapons
ENERGY WEAPON DESCRIPTION QUALITIES
Antiproton Beam Disruptor Electromagnetic
or Ionic
Free Electron
Laser
Graviton Beam Phase/Pulse
Phased Polaron
Beam
Phaser Proton Beam Tetryon Beam Pulsed beams of antiprotons especially damaging to a ship’s hull and physical
systems. High Yield
Disruptors are potent, damaging weapons favored by Klingons, Romulans, and
a variety of other civilizations’ fleets. Intense
Electromagnetic or ionic weapons can disrupt power systems, draining power
from the ships they hit.
Dampening,
Piercing
Used for both defense and mining during the early years of Human interstellar
travel, these are not especially effective as weapons.
—
These weapons fire high-energy gravitons intended to inflict intense
gravitational stresses on a target’s superstructure.
Devastating,
Piercing
The predecessor to phasers, phase weapons were used by the United Earth
Starfleet, and the Federation Starfleet that succeeded it, in the 22nd century, but
had largely been replaced by phasers in the 23rd century.
Versatile 1
Favored by the Dominion, phased polaron weapons are highly effective at
cutting through deflector shields and other starship defenses.
Intense,
Piercing
Common to Starfleet and a few civilizations’ fleets, phasers are a precise and
adaptable weapon. Versatile 2
Focused proton beams can leave lingering disruptive energy that wears away at
the target’s shields and hull over time. Persistent
Beams of concentrated tetryon radiation have an effect which can disrupt
standard starship deflector shields. Depleting
: . Energy Weapon Delivery Systems
ENERGY WEAPON DESCRIPTION Cannon
Banks
Arrays
Compact weapon systems designed to
produce short, powerful pulses or bolts of
energy at the target.
An energy weapon bank consists of multiple
emitters packed together, producing a focused
beam or several longer pulses, inflicting
damage to enemies.
Long linked strips of emitters allow the weapon
to discharge at any point along the strip,
and often at multiple points along the strip if
needed. This versatility allows a vessel to fire
at multiple targets, or maintain fire on a moving
target, from any direction.
Spinal Lance
Some ships integrate large weapon systems
into their hulls, often running the length of the
ship. These weapons are very powerful, but
difficult to bring to bear against a target.
RANGE DAMAGE QUALITIES
Close Ship’s Scale +2 —
Medium Ship’s Scale +1 —
Medium Ship’s Scale
Area or Spread
(attacker
chooses when
attack is made)
Long Ship’s Scale +3 Cumbersome
228
CHAPTER 5
TORPEDOES
TORPEDOES ARE HEAVY PROJECTILES THAT CARRY
powerful explosives or energetic payloads. Firing torpe-
does escalates hostilities, so attacking with torpedoes
immediately adds 1 Threat. Attacks using torpedoes
have a base Difficulty of 3.
Torpedoes may also be fired in a salvo if desired. Firing
a salvo of torpedoes adds 3 Threat instead of 1 but also
adds 1 to the attack’s Damage rating. Firing a salvo also
grants either the Area or Spread quality, chosen by the
attacker before attempting the attack.
All torpedoes inflict a set amount of damage, plus any
bonus derived from the ship’s Weapons system rating.
: . Types of Torpedo
The following table describes different types of tor-
pedo types installed on starships and space stations
across the Galaxy, and lists the range, Damage rating,
and qualities each type possesses. Guided by internal
sensors, torpedoes can be detonated either remotely or
upon impact.
: . Torpedo Types
TYPE DESCRIPTION RANGE DAMAGE
RATING QUALITES
Chroniton
Gravimetric
Neutronic
Nuclear
Photon
Photonic
Plasma
Polaron
These advanced weapons, employed by highly
advanced cultures who have developed temporal
technology. If they pierce shields, they can induce a
temporal displacement effect in a vessel, hindering its
ability to respond to attack.
A technology employed by the Borg—and likely taken
from an assimilated culture—gravimetric torpedoes
use graviton inversion fields to tear at an enemy’s hull.
An evolution of the technology behind quantum
torpedoes, neutronic torpedoes douse a target with
neutronic radiation, disrupting power systems.
Primitive nuclear fusion or nuclear fission warheads,
generating intense heat, radiation, and explosive
force, were commonly used during the Earth-
Romulan War.
Commonly used by many civilizations, photon
torpedoes use a controlled matter/antimatter reaction
to create a devastating blast and burst of energy.
The precursor to photon torpedoes, photonic
torpedoes operate by the same method—a matter/
antimatter reaction—but are less refined and the
reaction less controlled.
A common armament of Romulan warships, plasma
torpedoes generate a field of destructive plasma
around the target, which continues to damage the
target over time.
Installed on several Klingon vessels after the
Dominion War, polaron torpedoes are more able to
pierce a target’s shields and other defenses.
Long 3 Calibration,
Slowing
Long 5
Calibration,
Cumbersome,
High Yield,
Piercing
Long 4 Calibration,
Dampening
Medium 3 Calibration,
Intense
Long 3 High Yield
Long 2 High Yield
Long 5
Calibration,
Cumbersome,
Persistent
Long 3 Calibration,
Piercing
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
229
: . Torpedo Types (continued)
TORPEDO TYPE DESCRIPTION RANGE DAMAGE
RATING QUALITES
Positron
Quantum
Spatial
Tetryonic
Transphasic
Tricobalt
Introduced by the Dominion by the Kessok, positron
torpedoes are slow-moving compared to other
torpedoes of the time, and easy to avoid or intercept.
However, their payload is large and potent.
A more advanced torpedo developed by the
Federation in the wake of their clashes with the
Borg, these destructive weapons add quantum
vacuum energy to the energy released from their
matter/antimatter reaction, giving them destructive
power greater than the payload alone would
normally produce.
Standard chemical explosive warheads fitted to a
guided missile. These were used by the United Earth
Starfleet during the 22nd century but were eventually
replaced by early photonic torpedoes.
Originally of Tzenkethi design, tetryonic torpedoes
are primarily used against hardened targets—those
with heavy defenses, strong shields, and armored
hulls. After depleting shields, they are liable to cause
major damage.
Originally developed as an anti-Borg countermeasure
in an alternate future, these torpedoes exist in
multiple, dimensional phases at once, bypassing
defenses that do not exist in every such phase.
Borderline illegal due to potential subspace
interactions, tricobalt explosives can be delivered
as a torpedo payload. The resultant device is potent
for demolitions—destroying stationary facilities,
asteroids, comets, and other targets far larger than
starships—but tend to be unwieldy for use in combat.
Long 5
Calibration,
Cumbersome,
Dampening
Long 4
Calibration,
High Yield,
Intense
Medium 2 –
Long 2 Depleting,
High Yield
Long 4
Calibration,
Devastating,
Piercing
Long 6
Area,
Calibration,
Cumbersome
!
230
CHAPTER 5
 Improvised Armaments
Most vessels described in this book employ only a
small number of reliable forms of weaponry—phasers,
disruptors, photon torpedoes—and not the wider range
of esoteric armaments found in this subchapter.
been countless occasions where engineers and tactical
officers have worked to generate other methods to over-
come threats.
These additional armaments are available for use by
unusual alien species, such as the Dominion and the
civilizations encountered by the U.S.S. Voyager during
its time in the Delta Quadrant. However, they are also
available as tools for the gamemaster and players.
Any of the weapon types presented could be used as
the basis for a form of “improvised” weapon devel-
oped by a starship’s crew, perhaps as a modification
of phaser emitters, careful customization of a torpedo
warhead, or as an energy or particle stream emitted
from the ship’s main deflector. Creating any of these
options could be handled as simply as creating a trait
during a scene.
While a Starfleet vessel may appear only to have its
phasers and torpedoes to rely on in a crisis, there have
TRACTOR BEAMS
THOUGH USUALLY USED FOR SUBLIGHT TOWING OF
disabled vessels or asteroids, tractor beams are often
as useful as destructive weapons when in ship com-
bat, especially in the hands of an experienced officer.
Throughout history, the ability to keep an enemy ship
from moving away with low energy graviton beams has
prevented entire battles. The utility of being able to pull
objects closer or push them out of the way has been
so beneficial that almost every Starfleet vessel has an
emitter installed.
The Difficulty of any task to try to escape the tractor
beam is equal to the tractor beam’s Strength. The task
a ship must attempt to break free of a tractor beam is
related to how the crew narratively wishes to escape.
Some examples include:
The Strength of the tractor beam is equal to the ship’s
Scale minus 1. Trapping a target within the beam is a
Difficulty 2 Control + Security task assisted by the ship’s
Structure + Security. If successful, the target is immobi-
lized and cannot move until it can break free.
§ DISABLING THE EMITTER: Control + Security
assisted by the ship’s Weapons + Security.
§ DISRUPTING THE EMITTER: Reason + Science
assisted by the ship’s Sensors + Science.
§ MODULATING SHIELDS: Insight + Engineering
assisted by the ship’s Structure + Security.
§ RAW POWER: Daring + Conn assisted by the ship’s
Engines + Conn.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
231
: . CHAPTER 5.7
SMALL CRAFT
“I’d be a little less concerned with winning the
Nobel Prize right now and a little more concerned
with Trip and Malcolm. Their shuttlepod doesn’t
have the hull plating we do.
- Captain Jonathan Archer
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LT. COMMANDER
BURK VEN JAXA
Shuttles, runabouts,
workbees, and other
support craft are
just as important to
the success of our
missions as our ship
or station. Let’s talk
briefly about small craft
operations.
SHUTTLES AND OTHER SMALL
craft—also known as auxiliary craft—are
commonly found aboard starships and
starbases, as well as on a range of other
facilities. The terms apply to any small ves-
sel which can function independently of
a starship for a short time, and which are
employed in circumstances which would
be unsuitable for a full-size starship.
Use of shuttles to move personnel and
cargo short distances (between ships)
is less common with the use of trans-
porters, but it's always valuable to have
a few auxiliary craft on board in case of
emergencies or unusual situations.
Small Craft consist of the following
elements:
§ TRAITS: All Small Craft have the trait
Small Craft in addition to any others.
§ SYSTEMS: Small Craft have the
same set of systems as a starship,
though their scores tend to be
somewhat lower as befits their
smaller size and more limited capa-
bilities. Unarmed Small Craft have a
Weapons system of 0.
§ DEPARTMENTS: Small Craft have
the same set of departments as a
starship, but their scores are never
higher than 2, and are often 0, due
to limited facilities and a complete
lack of support personnel. The only
department a Small Craft will always
have will be Conn, which will always
be at least 1.
§ TALENTS: Small Craft do not nor-
mally have talents. Some advanced,
unique, or customizable Small Craft,
such as a Runabout, or the U.S.S
Voyager’s Delta Flyer, may have one
or two talents as befits their more
advanced capabilities.
§ SCALE: Small Craft are normally Scale
1 or Scale 2. Starships that do not
have the Extensive Shuttlebays talent
may carry Scale 1 small craft only.
§ RESISTANCE: Small Craft have 0
Resistance, unless granted any bo-
nuses from talents.
§ SHIELDS: Small Craft have shields
calculated as normal; add together
Scale, Structure, and Security.
§ POWER: Small Craft have much
smaller power plants than full-size
starships and can only use the
Reroute Power action to enable ac-
tions which require power.
§ CREW SUPPORT: Small Craft do not
have Crew Support.
§ MAXIMUM CAPACITY: Small Craft
can only carry a finite number of char-
acters, as noted in each entry.
§ POSITIONS: Small Craft have two
positions: Pilot (covering Helm
and Navigation), and Operations
(Operations and Sensors, plus Tactical
if the craft has weapons). Small Craft
operated by a single operator combine
these into a single position.
232
CHAPTER 5
 Shuttle Variants
Most polities produce dozens of types of shuttles—
materials fabricators and tool replicators make cus-
tomization easy, and even in heavily regimented and
controlled organizations such as militaries, there’s
value in a ship carrying different varieties of shuttle to
serve different jobs.
As a result, the small craft described here are baselines,
representing a common standard of each type of vessel.
Specific details can be adjusted to fit specific needs by
discussing them with your gamemaster. Most differenc-
es can be accounted for by adding or removing a trait,
such as adding a No Passenger Space trait to a shuttle
fitted for hauling cargo only.
Shuttlepod
Small Craft
A tiny craft, designed to move small numbers of person-
nel or small quantities of cargo over short distances.
They are unarmed, not fitted with a transporter, and not
capable of travelling at warp.
TRAITS: Shuttlepod, Sublight, Small Craft, Unarmed
CREW COMPLEMENT: 1 or 2, plus 2 passengers
SCALE: 1
SHIELDS (4):
Systems
COMMS 03
STRUCTURE 03
COMPUTERS 02
WEAPONS
–
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE
–
CONN 01
SECURITY
–
SCIENCE 01
Weapons
§ None
Talent
§ RUGGED DESIGN: See page 225
ENGINES 03
SENSORS 03
In addition to the above, when small craft are attacked by
any full-size starship (any vessel which lacks the Small
Craft trait), the Difficulty of the Attack increases by 1.
A vessel with the Small Craft trait may always land on a
planetary surface, the deck of a ship, or any other solid
surface, without needing the Landing Gear special rule.
They are small and lightweight enough for routine take-
off and landing, unlike full-size starships.
Shuttlecraft
Small Craft
A small vessel, designed to move groups of personnel or
modest quantities of cargo over intrasystem and short
interstellar distances. They are often fitted with a small
phaser bank, and they can travel at low warp, or match
the cruising speed of starships only for short periods.
TRAITS: Shuttlecraft, Short-Range, Small Craft, Unarmed
CREW COMPLEMENT: 1 or 2, plus up to 6 passengers
depending on shuttle type
SCALE: 1
SHIELDS (6):
Systems
COMMS 05
STRUCTURE 05
COMPUTERS 05
WEAPONS
–
ENGINES 05
SENSORS 04
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE
–
CONN 01
SECURITY
–
SCIENCE 01
Weapons
§ None. Shuttlecraft may be armed with a Phaser Bank
(Energy, Medium, Damage 2, Versatile 2), which
removes the Unarmed trait. Arming a shuttlecraft has
an escalation cost 1.
Talent
§ RUGGED DESIGN: See page 225.
Special Rule
§ TRANSPORTER: Some shuttlecraft are fitted with a
escape transporter. Taking this option has opportuni-
ty cost 1.
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
233
Runabout
Small Craft
These larger auxiliary craft—such as the Danube-class
runabouts used by Starfleet—are technically small
starships, and are used for independent operations from
larger starships and starbases. Runabouts are capable
of a sustained warp speed (usually around warp 5), con-
tain a small transporter pad and replicator.
TRAITS: Light Starship, Small Craft
CREW COMPLEMENT: 1 to 4
SCALE: 2
SHIELDS (10):
Weapons
§ PHASER BANKS: Energy, Medium, Damage 4,
Versatile 2
§ MICRO-TORPEDOES: Torpedo, Long, Damage 3,
High Yield
Talent
§ RUGGED DESIGN: See page 225.
Systems
COMMS 09
COMPUTERS 08
ENGINES 07
SENSORS 07
STRUCTURE 07
WEAPONS 07
Departments
COMMAND
–
CONN 02
ENGINEERING 01
SECURITY 01
MEDICINE
SCIENCE
–
–
Special Rules
§ CUSTOMIZABLE MODULES: The runabout may
be fitted with one of the following modules for
additional functionality. Taking any of these options
has an opportunity cost 1, but these options can
only be taken when preparing the runabout from a
starbase, surface facility, or a starship with Extensive
Shuttlebays.
§ CARGO TRANSPORT: The runabout’s aft module
has been configured to carry bulk cargo.
§ COMBAT MISSION: Add 1 to damage of the runa-
bout’s weapons, and add 2 to the ship’s maximum
Shields. This has an escalation cost 1.
§ LONG DURATION MISSION: The runabout’s aft
module has been configured to serve as a rest area
and sleeping quarters for up to four personnel.
§ PASSENGER TRANSPORT: The runabout may
carry up to 10 passengers, or up to 40 in an emer-
gency, for a maximum of 2 hours.
§ SENSOR MODULE: Add 1 to the runabout’s
Computers and Sensors, and add the High-
Resolution Sensors talent.
234
CHAPTER 5
EAGLEMOSS LTD.
ENGINES 08
SENSORS 07
Captain’s Yacht
Small Craft
A specialty small craft often attached to diplomatic ves-
sels, the captain’s yacht was a large shuttlecraft designed
to aid commanding officers during diplomatic missions.
TRAITS: Specialized Shuttle, Small Craft, Luxurious
CREW COMPLEMENT: 1 to 2, plus up to 10 passengers
SCALE: 2
SHIELDS (9):
Systems
COMMS 09
STRUCTURE 07
COMPUTERS 08
WEAPONS 07
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE
–
CONN 01
SECURITY
–
SCIENCE
–
Weapons
§ Phaser Banks: Energy, Medium, Damage 4,
Versatile 2
§ Micro-torpedoes: Torpedo, Long, Damage 3,
High Yield
Talent
§ DIPLOMATIC SUITES: See page 221.
EAGLEMOSS LTD.
Attack Fighter
Small Craft
At various times, different civilizations have
attempted to make widespread use of small
craft in combat, with armed shuttles and high-agil-
ity attack fighters developed for this purpose. The
Federation has, on several occasions, developed attack
fighters to supplement a fleet stretched thin during war-
time, with varying degrees of success. Their small size
means that their armaments draw most of the available
power, and they are very rarely capable of traveling at
warp. Even 24th century versions can only sustain low
warp speeds for under an hour.
TRAITS: Attack Fighter, Small Craft, Agile
CREW COMPLEMENT: 1 or 2
SCALE: 1
SHIELDS (8):
Systems
COMMS 05
STRUCTURE 05
COMPUTERS 05
WEAPONS 07
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING
–
MEDICINE
–
CONN 01
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE
–
Weapons
§ Phaser Cannons: Energy, Close, Damage 4,
Versatile 2
§ Micro-torpedoes: Torpedo, Long, Damage 3,
High Yield
Talent
§ IMPROVED IMPULSE DRIVE: See page 223.
ENGINES 07
SENSORS 06
YOUR HOME AMONG THE STARS
235
236
CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 6
TECHNOLOGY
AND WEAPONS
6.1 A Galactic Toolkit 238
6.2 Weapons and Gear 241
MATHEUS GRAEF
237
: . CHAPTER 6.1
A GALACTIC TOOLKIT
“You Starfleet types are too
dependent on gadgets and gizmos.
You lose your natural instincts for survival.
- Major Kira Nerys
TECHNOLOGY IN STAR TREK
Adventures is handled with a simple
philosophy in mind: a device is only
useful if it enables a person to achieve
something useful. Star Trek is brimming
with a dizzying array of sophisticated
technologies, but these technologies ex-
ist only to serve the needs of the users.
COMMON EQUIPMENT
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LT. COMMANDER
BURK VEN JAXA
One thing you should
understand about our
technology is it’s really
amazing, allowing us
to test the limits of our
individual potential
while exploring the
unknown frontiers of
understanding. Like
I remind my team,
though, technology
itself is a tool, built with
purpose and best used
with proficiency. This
chapter details some of
the most important tools
you’ll likely use in your
adventures.
THE FEDERATION, AND MOST OTHER
spacefaring civilizations, are societies
where few things are scarce. Many
common items can be replicated or
assembled from replicated components,
meaning that few people experience
situations where the right tools for a
specific task are unavailable.
In game terms, most ordinary items
take the form of an equipment trait,
where the item’s name is the name of
the trait (see page 251 for more details
on traits). An equipment trait allows the
owner to attempt tasks and activities
they would not usually be able to at-
tempt, or reduces the Difficulty of a task
by 1. A tricorder, for example, enables
the character to attempt tasks a tricord-
er would logically let them do, such
as scanning for items that cannot be
perceived by the naked eye, and makes
tasks a tricorder would assist them with
easier, such as analyzing the details of
an environment.
Most items do not have individual or
specific rules. Descriptions of a wide
range of common items can be found
later in this chapter, to provide guidance
on how they work.
: . Obtaining items
Acquiring most items is not particularly
difficult. Even a small starship has many
convenient storage compartments con-
taining a wide variety of commonly-used
tools. Shipboard replicators can produce
other items, or parts for those items, in a
matter of moments.
A character always has access to their
standard issue equipment. The presence
of those items is assumed, and charac-
ters don’t need to take any additional
action to be carrying those items. In addi-
tion, some items will be necessary for the
task ahead; the gamemaster should grant
these items for free. A common example
of necessary items includes environment
or EVA suits, without which a character
cannot survive in certain environments.
Characters wishing to take items beyond
standard issue must retrieve them from
storage, replicate them, or otherwise
spend time to collect them.
§ If the situation is not time-sensitive,
or cannot get worse by spending
time preparing, retrieving gear can
be done for free: the character states
which equipment they wish to obtain,
and obtain it.
238
CHAPTER 6
§ If the situation is time-sensitive, or could deteriorate
by spending additional time preparing, obtaining
equipment has a cost: the character states which
items they wish to obtain, and then must spend
Momentum to retrieve them.
OPPORTUNITY COSTS
Spending Momentum to obtain an item is an opportu-
nity cost: time spent gathering extra items steals away
potential opportunities the crew may have, or even
creates opportunities for the situation to get worse.
Whenever an item has an opportunity cost, it is listed as
Opportunity X, where X is the amount of Momentum
spent to obtain the item. Opportunity costs are an
Immediate Momentum spend (see page 260)—mean-
ing the Momentum spent does not have to come from
a successful task, and can be paid for from the group’s
Momentum pool or by adding Threat.
§ If the item is standard issue, or otherwise easily ob-
tainable, the opportunity cost is 0.
§ If the item can be easily replicated, or is found in spe-
cific storage lockers, it has an opportunity cost 1.
This is common for most engineering tools and
medical equipment.
§ If the item is particularly bulky or cumbersome, highly
specialized, or requires significant effort to set up, it
has an opportunity cost 2. This covers items like bulky
environmental gear, tools used to move heavy or vola-
tile cargo, and items found in a specific lab or storage
unit, or which must be replicated and assembled.
Any item which would be rarer or more inconvenient to
obtain can only be obtained at the gamemaster’s dis-
cretion, usually through use of a task: perhaps to create
or assemble a highly specialized device, or to negotiate
to use a one-of-a-kind item that someone else needs
for their own work. It may even require inventing a new
device, potentially requiring several tasks or a chal-
lenge to create.
Tools which are more specialized or more difficult to
obtain may provide more valuable benefits in the right
circumstances: a medical tricorder provides a trained
user with useful information about a patient’s health,
but a detronal scanner can provide detailed genetic
analysis that a medical tricorder cannot. There aren’t as
many detronal ship as there are medical tricorders, so
the more specialized tool has an extra cost to obtain.
 Standard Issue Gear
A few items are so ubiquitous among Starfleet person-
nel that the rules assume their presence as a matter
of course. The items a character gains as standard
equipment during character creation are regarded this
way. For non-Starfleet characters, this list of standard
gear may differ—Klingon warriors customarily wear
armor, for example, and several cultures use disruptors
rather than phasers—but most of these differences are
minor. The gamemaster determines these variations in
unusual cases.
It also falls to the gamemaster to determine whether a
given item’s effects are assumed (and thus already in-
cluded in the Difficulty of a task, or the ability to attempt
the task in the first place), or if using the item affects
the task further. If an item’s effects are assumed, the
absence of that item usually makes tasks more difficult
or even impossible.
ESCALATION COSTS
Some items—most commonly weapons, destructive
equipment, or anything that signifies aggression—may
have an additional cost, called an escalation cost.
Escalation costs are paid by adding Threat, to reflect po-
tentially escalating an uncertain or dangerous situation.
Items with an escalation cost are listed with Escalation
X, where X is the amount of Threat added when the item
is obtained.
§ If the item is a small sidearm, such as a hand phaser
(type 1 or type 2), knife, or other single-handed
blade which can be holstered or sheathed, or if
armored pieces are part of your standard uniform
(such as with Klingons and Cardassians), the esca-
lation cost is 0.
§ If the item is large and imposing (such as a large
melee weapon like a bat’leth) or demonstrates an
expectation of greater-than-normal danger (such as
heavier body armor), the escalation cost is 1.
§ If the item significantly increases the combat ef-
fectiveness of the character—such as a rifle, heavy
weaponry, explosives, or personal forcefield projec-
tors—the escalation cost is 2.
Items may have both opportunity costs and escalation
costs.
TECHNOLOGy & WEAPONS
239
 Carrying Capacity
Characters can only carry so much at any one time. In
addition to their standard equipment and any equipment
the character is wearing, a character may carry up to
two items at once, or a single large item (or two-hand-
ed weapon). A character may also wear a single suit
(armor or an EVA suit). A character may try to carry
more than this, but each additional item imposes a trait
(Overburdened) on the character, which hinders the
character’s physical activities and may prevent them
from taking certain actions (you can’t wield a weapon if
your hands are full, for example).
: . Multiple Items
When a character obtains an item, they obtain one of
that item. If they wish to obtain additional identical items,
they must pay the opportunity cost for each one.
Escalation costs are not increased in this manner. A
single escalation cost is paid regardless of how many of a
specific item is obtained, but if a character wishes to ob-
tain multiple different items, they must pay the escalation
cost for each of those different items, where applicable.
240
CHAPTER 6
DAT PHAN
 Personnel Support
While not technically equipment, personnel can be
used in a comparable manner—a team of engineers
or scientists can help a character, making tasks easier
or allowing them to attempt activities they could not
perform alone. And, just like equipment, characters can
obtain assistants with relative ease, so long as they’re
willing to take the time to gather those personnel.
A team of personnel—a half-dozen or so personnel from
a single department—can be obtained in the same way
as a piece of equipment. It serves as a trait in the same
way as an item of equipment, with the name of the trait
noting the specialty of the team (such as Science Team
or Medical Team), and has opportunity cost 1.
Security teams, which are more likely to be useful in
combat as they are armed, also have escalation cost 1.
Personnel used in this way are distinct from supporting
characters—a team advantage represents a group of
assistants, while a supporting character is an individual
with more involved rules (see page 146).
: . CHAPTER 6.2
WEAPONS AND GEAR
“Calm down. It’s set to...
uh, it was... it was set to stun.
- Ensign Beckett Mariner
THIS SECTION DETAILS WEAPONS,
protective gear, and other items used in
combat. These have additional rules be-
yond being treated as equipment traits.
WEAPONS
WHILE PEACE IS STARFLEET’S GOAL,
means of self-defense are often neces-
sary. Starfleet thus makes use of several
types of weapons.
Weapons and other forms of attack, as
well as the damage caused by hazards,
have a few common elements determin-
ing the specifics of how they function.
The key elements of a weapon of a
weapon include:
§ WEAPON TYPE: Either melee or
ranged, determining what kind of
attack it allows you to make.
§ INJURIES: The type of injury the weap-
on inflicts. If the weapon has multiple
options, all of them will be listed.
§ SEVERITY: The severity of the inju-
ries the weapon inflicts. This is used
to determine the cost of avoiding the
injury, and the Difficulty of tasks to
treat or heal the injury.
§ SIZE: Weapons will either be
one-handed (1H) or two-handed
(2H). A two-handed weapon can be
used in one hand to make an attack,
but the Difficulty increases by 1.
§ QUALITIES: Additional rules, provid-
ing additional restrictions or benefits
to the weapon’s use.
: . Qualities
The following qualities alter the way
the weapon functions: some in positive
ways, others by applying restrictions:
§ ACCURATE: If you perform the
Aim minor action before making
an attack with this weapon, you
may re-roll up to two d20s in your
dice pool, rather than only one.
§ AREA: When you succeed at an attack,
additional targets in the same zone
may be hit by spending 1 Momentum
for each additional target (Repeatable).
This attack may Succeed at Cost.
§ CHARGE: If you perform the Prepare
minor action before attacking with
this weapon, you may add one of
the following qualities to the attack:
Area, Intense, or Piercing. If you
choose Area, the attack’s severity is
reduced by 1.
§ CUMBERSOME: You cannot attack
with a cumbersome weapon unless
you take the Prepare minor action on
the same turn.
§ DEBILITATING: The Difficulty to treat
or to heal injuries caused by this
weapon is increased by 1.
§ GRENADE: You can attack a target at
up to Medium range and have enough
grenades for three separate attacks.
LT. COMMANDER
BURK VEN JAXA
We've talked about
common equipment
and how to obtain it.
Let’s get practical
now, and discuss the
wide variety of tools
and weapons you’re
likely to use during
your missions.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
TECHNOLOGy & WEAPONS
241
§ HIDDEN X: You can use a minor action to conceal this
weapon. Any search for the weapon requires an Insight
or Reason + Security task with a Difficulty of X.
§ INACCURATE: The weapon is imprecise and clumsy.
You do not benefit from the Aim minor action when
making an attack with this weapon.
MELEE WEAPONS
NEARLY EVERY SENTIENT SPECIES HAS DEVELOPED
weapons capable of breaking limbs or cutting flesh.
Some of these weapons were culturally important and
have remained in use even after that culture entered the
wider interstellar community.
 Improvised Attacks
Improvised attacks take the form of more mundane ob-
jects being used as weapons. You may need to create a
trait to assemble an improvised weapon or set up a trap.
Once you have created the trait, the gamemaster should
determine the type, injury, severity, size, and qualities of
the attack, as well as any other limitations. The gam-
emaster should also determine what combination of
attribute + department is used to make the attack.
§ TYPE: Melee or ranged, based on your intent. A
poisoned hypospray is used at Reach, so it’s a melee
attack, while a rockslide is ranged because it affects
enemies at a distance.
§ INJURY: The gamemaster determines an appropriate
Injury (and type of Injury) for the attack.
§ SEVERITY: The typical severity for unarmed attacks is
2. This may be increased if the attack has a Size of 2H,
or if it is otherwise especially destructive or powerful.
§ SIZE: If the item used to make the attack is carried in
one hand, the attack’s size is 1H. If it takes two hands
to make the attack, then its size is 2H.
§ QUALITIES: All improvised attacks have the
Cumbersome quality—they’re not as easy to use as a
proper weapon. The gamemaster may determine the
attack has other qualities, based on how it is used.
§ OTHER LIMITATIONS: The gamemaster may intro-
duce other narrative limitations, particularly if the at-
tack is potent. This may limit how often the attack can
be used, or lingering consequences from the attack.
242
CHAPTER 6
§ INTENSE: When making an attack with this weap-
on, you may increase the severity by spending 1
Momentum, rather than 2 (Repeatable).
§ PIERCING: A successful attack with this weapon
ignores the target's Protection rating.
§ While not really equipment, every character has the
means to make an unarmed attack, striking with
fists, feet, knees, elbows, head, or otherwise using
brute force without a weapon. Countless martial
arts, such as Klingon mok’bara, Vulcan suus mahna,
and Human styles like boxing or aikido, exist to
allow individuals to hone their ability to disable foes
without weapons.
§ Not a conventional weapon, but it’s not unknown
for medics and doctors to try to defuse situations
by sedating someone dangerous, using an anes-
thetic hypospray. Any character carrying a medkit
is assumed to carry a hypospray that can be used in
this way.
§ Bladed weapons such as a knife or dagger are
useful as tools or for close combat situations. While
projectile weapons and later energy weapons have
surpassed the destructive power of hand weap-
ons, developments over the centuries in materials
science have given these weapons continued use in
nearly every service as backup weapons or as tools.
§ Larger blades such as the Klingon mek’leth, the
Andorian ushaan-tor, or various forms of sword, pro-
vide more of a symbolic use, but still are used ritually,
in sports, or even in real combat, depending on the
skill and inclination of the individual.
§ Heavy blades like the Klingon bat’leth, Jem’Hadar
kar’takin, and the Vulcan lirpa see use in ritualized
combat or in situations where hand-to-hand combat
is almost assured.
§ Bludgeons, ranging from improvised blunt objects,
to batons, cudgels, and maces—are a useful way of
fending off aggressors or disabling enemies. This
can also be used for any two-handed ranged weapon
wielded as an impromptu club.
: . Weapons
NAME TYPE INJURY SEVERITY SIZE QUALITIES COST
Unarmed Strike Melee Stun 2 1H – –
Anesthetic Hypospray Melee Stun 3 1H Cumbersome, Intense Opportunity 1
Knife/Dagger Melee Deadly 2 1H Hidden 1 Opportunity 1
Blade Melee Deadly 3 1H – Opportunity 1
Heavy Blade Melee Deadly 3 2H Intense Opportunity 1,
Escalation 1
Bludgeon Melee Stun, Deadly 3 1H – Opportunity 1
Phaser Type-1 Ranged Stun, Deadly 3 1H Charge, Hidden 1 Standard Issue
Phaser Type-2 Ranged Stun, Deadly 4 1H Charge Standard Issue
Phaser Type-3
(phaser rifle) Ranged Stun, Deadly 5 2H Accurate, Charge Opportunity 1,
Escalation 2
Pulse Grenade Ranged Stun, Deadly 4 1H Area, Grenade Opportunity 1,
Escalation 2
Andorian Plasma Rifle Ranged Deadly 4 2H Accurate, Intense Not Available
Phase Pistol Ranged Stun, Deadly 3 1H – Standard Issue
Particle Rifle Ranged Stun, Deadly 4 2H Accurate Standard Issue
Disruptor Pistol Ranged Deadly 4 1H Intense Not Available
Disruptor Rifle Ranged Deadly 5 2H Accurate, Intense Not Available
Jem’Hadar Plasma Pistol Ranged Deadly 4 1H Debilitating Not Available
Jem’Hadar Plasma Rifle Ranged Deadly 5 2H Accurate, Debilitating Not Available
PHASERS
DEVELOPED IN THE MID-22ND CENTURY, THE HAND
phaser was an outgrowth from research into focused
particle streams for higher efficiency warp cores.
Primitive phaser systems, such as the phase pistol, were
refined into true phaser systems by the 23rd century.
Hand phasers use a phased and modulated particle
beam that can transmit incredible amounts of energy
onto a target depending on the setting of the device and
the frequency of the power modulation.
At their lowest settings, all phasers are capable of
long-term use, but at their highest settings a type-1
hand phaser may only have enough energy stored for a
few seconds of use compared to the type-3 phaser rifle
that may allow for a full minute or more of discharge at
the highest settings. Hand phasers of the 23rd century
typically only used a single particle emitter. By the 24th
century, multiple emitters were in widespread use,
allowing for redundancy and higher destructive potential
at lower power emission settings.
Starfleet hand phasers have multiple distinct settings
ranging from heating an object or causing light burns,
stunning a life-form through ‘shorting out’ its central
nervous system, up to cutting through a target or entirely
disintegrating it. All hand phasers use a high-energy
density power cell as their power source, and are split
into three categories that are dependent on their power
storage capabilities.
§ The phaser type-1 is the smallest design, which is
the most widely-used form of phaser distributed to
personnel for self-defense.
§ Phaser type-2 refers to the larger form of hand phaser,
carried by security personnel and Starfleet officers go-
ing into dangerous environments. Some versions used
TECHNOLOGy & WEAPONS
243
in the 23rd century are pistol grip attachments fitted
to a phaser type-1. Type-2 phasers of the 24th century
carry a design with a curved ergonomic grip.
§ Phaser type-3, or phaser rifles, are higher-powered
weapons designed for hazardous situations and com-
bat. In addition to a larger power supply, they have
numerous targeting and beam-focusing systems that
make them more accurate. They are issued to proper-
ly-trained personnel, and only when necessary.
§ Pulse Grenades work when a user selects a setting
and a countdown timer. When the timer reaches zero,
the grenade discharges its power cell at once in all
directions. After discharge, the grenade’s components
burn out, rendering them inert to prevent them being
reused. Pulse grenades cover a number of similar
technologies used throughout history—from the stun
grenades used by United Earth MACO forces to pho-
ton grenades employed in the 24th century.
EARLY ENERGY WEAPONS
THERE ARE MANY TYPES OF HAND WEAPONS
Starfleet crews can encounter traveling across the
Federation, but the two most typically seen civilian
weapons are derived from the Andorian plasma rifle
and the 21st and early 22nd century Earth particle rifle.
Andorian plasma rifles use similar principles to phasers
used by Starfleet, with a particle beam as the primary
effect. The particle beam is augmented by an encap-
sulated plasma discharge that causes thermal damage
to a target. This means Andorian style plasma rifles are
unable to cause a stun effect, and at best can knock a
humanoid unconscious through pain.
Particle rifles and phase pistols were early forms of
directed energy weapons used before the development
of phasers. The most advanced designs of particle rifle
were those produced for United Earth MACO forces in
the 22nd century, while phase pistols were introduced in
2151 to replace the EM-33 plasma pistol.
ALIEN ENERGY WEAPONS
LIKE HAND PHASERS, DISRUPTOR AND PLASMA
weapons typically use a high-density power cell to
provide power, or an energy source of similar capacity.
Pistols can be held in a single hand, while rifles tend to
need the use of two hands to balance and aim. These
weapons are typically less versatile than phasers, inflict
significantly more damage.
§ Disruptor weapons rely on high energy particle dis-
charges that burn or boil targets, and can disintegrate
a target if enough energy is applied.
§ The plasma weapons used by the Dominion’s
Jem’Hadar soldiers cause severe burns and death
through thermal shock, and incorporate an anticoag-
ulant that makes injuries harder to treat.
ARMOR AND PROTECTIVE GEAR
MANY CULTURES MAKE USE OF METAL, CERAMIC, OR
other dense materials to provide additional protection
from attacks and hazards. In some extreme cases,
personal forcefield projectors are used to protect against
severe danger, though these are not particularly efficient.
Armor provides a character with Protection, which
reduces the cost of avoiding injuries inflicted against
that character. A character may only wear a single form
of protective gear at a time. Many NPCs wear armored
uniforms, particularly those from militaristic cultures
such as the Klingons and Cardassians.
: . Armor and Protective Gear
NAME PROTECTION COST
Armored Vest 1 Standard Issue
Body Armor 2 Opportunity 1,
Escalation 1
Environment Suit 1 Opportunity 2
Personal
Forcefield
3, and see
description
Opportunity 1,
Escalation 2
244
CHAPTER 6
: . Armored Vest and
Body Armor
Body armor was issued to Starfleet security in earlier
eras. In the mid-23rd century, it took the form of an
armored vest usually worn by landing parties expecting
violence. In the late 23rd century, it took the form of a
bulky vest and helmet.
: . Personal Forcefield
These personal shields were sometimes issued to
security and combat personnel, though the power
requirements of such devices mean they have limited
use in protracted fighting. A character with a personal
forcefield gains the listed Protection, but it may also
be sacrificed when you avoid an injury. When sacri-
ficed, the type of injury is changed to a stun injury, and
then the forcefield burns out and provides no further
protection.
: . Environment Suit
Environment suits or EV suits are normally used for extrave-
hicular activities—such as moving in hard vacuum. These
suits are issued as required—the opportunity cost may be
ignored if the mission takes place in a deadly environment.
TOOLS AND PORTABLE ITEMS
THIS SECTION DETAILS A VARIETY OF TOOLS AND
devices characters may use during the course of their
career. Like weapons, some of these items have addi-
tional rules beyond being treated as an equipment trait.
: . Cybernetics
These items have no cost; they are permanent addi-
tions to the character, normally connected to a trait that
reflects a character’s specific disability.
: . Tricorders
“Tricorder” is a catch-all label given to devices that
sense, record, and analyze data.
During the 23rd century, there were two versions of the
Starfleet tricorder (science and medical), and a single
highly-specialized version (the psychotricorder). The
psychotricorder was primarily used by psychologists and
law enforcement agencies to determine a humanoid’s
behavioral and emotional state more accurately.
ARTIFICIAL ORGANS
Artificial organs have been in use since the mid-20th
century. Advances in neuron meshing and cybernetics
have improved these devices and made them virtually
identical in capability to biological ones. Characters who
need an artificial organ and do not possess them will die
within minutes to days depending on the organ and are
typically kept on life support while one is fabricated.
The more common medical and science tricorders dif-
fered in the range and scope of their sensors and ability
to use attachments. The medical tricorder had fewer
sensors and a shorter range as a tradeoff for higher-res-
olution scans oriented toward biological functions. The
science tricorder had a large multi-discipline database
and a built-in subspace uplink that could connect to
nearby Starfleet vessels for main computer access
when needed.
By the 24th century, tricorders were unified into a single
design as data storage and sensor design was further
miniaturized, including more specialist analysis capabili-
ties for engineering teams.
PROSTHESIS
Prosthetic limbs have been in use for centuries, and
advances in technology mean they function identically
to the limbs they replace. Arms, legs, and phalanges
lost due to trauma can be replaced with little difficulty.
Characters lacking their prosthetic may find their physi-
cal activities impaired, making some tasks more difficult
and others impossible.
Tricorders are standard issue, and do not have a cost.
ARTIFICIAL SENSORY ORGANS
Using neurological reconditioning and isolinear net-
works overlaid into a patient’s sensory cortex, artificial
sensory organs can replace damaged or destroyed
senses. This can mean the blind can see, the deaf can
hear, and even fingers can once again feel. Depending
on what era the item was made, the technology can look
highly artificial or barely noticeable.
TECHNOLOGy & WEAPONS
245
This technology includes sensors and other devices a
person may find useful in their life. Work with the gam-
emaster to determine the device's functionality, look,
and usefulness. While these devices can be advanta-
geous, there are potential disadvantages too, such as
charging the device periodically, headaches due to data
transfer, or the risk of the device being lost or damaged.
: . Engineering Devices
ENGINEERING MULTI-TOOL/ENGINEERING
TOOLKIT (STANDARD ISSUE FOR ENGINEERS,
OPPORTUNITY 1 OTHERWISE)
The engineering multi-tool acted as a tricorder-like
device to detect and diagnose system faults and could
be used as a multi-purpose tool. With the advent of
isolinear systems, the multi-tool was rendered obsolete
and many of the device’s uses were supplanted by the
tricorder. Tools were still needed to maintain and repair
damaged equipment, so the engineering toolkit was
introduced to provide nearly every tool a damage control
or engineering team may usually need.
MASS SPECTROMETER (OPPORTUNITY 1)
A mass spectrometer can take a sample of material,
break it down, and provide an incredible amount of detail
about the matter making it up. While tricorders can pro-
vide similar data, mass spectrometers can provide even
more specific detail.
PLASMA TORCH (OPPORTUNITY 1)
Plasma torches are high-energy cutting tools. Helium
is superheated and ionized before being focused by a
magnetic field into a microscopic beam, allowing the
beam to cut through all but the strongest of materials.
: . Medical Devices
If a character is in sickbay when a specific medical
device is required, reduce the opportunity cost by 1, to
a minimum of 0. A few of the items listed below are con-
sidered part of a medkit, which is standard issue for all
Starfleet medical personnel. A medkit has a opportunity
cost 1 for non-medical personnel.
MONITORING DEVICE (OPPORTUNITY 1)
This device, placed on the patient, is able to scan a life-
form, determine the function of a single vital organ or
biological function, and what the physiology suggests
are normal readings for that organ or function.
246
CHAPTER 6
ANABOLIC PROTOPLASER/DERMAL
REGENERATOR (PART OF MEDKIT)
The dermal regenerator stimulates an injured human-
oid's natural healing process to accelerate the produc-
tion of new skin cells and connective tissue.
EMERGENCY SURGICAL KIT (OPPORTUNITY 1)
A standard emergency surgical kit provides single-use
medical supplies capable of allowing a trained physician
the means to perform complex surgical procedures in
the field at the expense of equipment durability. The kit
contains a built-in PADD that gives readouts on basic bi-
ological functions important to physicians such as blood
pressure, heartbeat, temperature, etc. The display walks
unskilled civilians through triage steps.
LASER SCALPEL (PART OF MEDKIT)
Laser scalpels, also known as exoscalpels use a thin
low-power laser beam to cleanly cut through tissue to a
predetermined depth.
HYPOSPRAY (PART OF MEDKIT)
Hyposprays provide an efficient means to deliver drugs
that would otherwise have to be given by hypodermic
needle or IV drip.
: . Other Equipment
ANTI-GRAV SLED (OPPORTUNITY 2)
The anti-grav sled resembles a small cart without
wheels. On the bottom of the device are multiple grav-
iton emitters that counter the local gravity field, effec-
tively making the sled and any items placed on it nearly
weightless, though not massless.
BEACONS (OPPORTUNITY 1)
The standard issue Starfleet beacon has a wide range of
functions including changing the frequency of the light
emitted from near-infrared to long-wave ultraviolet and
providing a ‘white’ light for species that evolved with
different natural light. Beacons can also be set to emit
entirely in the near-infrared, providing a short-term heat
source in a survival situation.
COMMUNICATOR (STANDARD ISSUE)
During the 22nd and 23rd centuries, these devices were
handheld and allowed the user to communicate with a
starship in orbit or another communicator another com-
municator. By the 24th century, the communicator was,
making it small enough to be worn as a badge.
AUDIO RECEIVER (STANDARD ISSUE FOR COMMS
OFFICER, OPPORTUNITY 1 OTHERWISE)
The audio receiver ties into shipboard communication
networks and allows the user to listen to data coming
across subspace frequencies typically used for long-
range communication and ship to surface, but also
listening to computer alerts and and data. The receiver
can also be programmed to provide aural or vibrational
feedback, allowing sensor operators greater accuracy in
their duties. Characters using the audio receiver reduce
the complication range of tasks involving communica-
tions, starship operations, or sensor operations by 1.
HOLOGRAPHIC IMAGER (OPPORTUNITY 1)
The holographic imager is a hand-held multi-spectral
camera capable of recording nearly unlimited still and
moving images with a resolution down to the micron
level. The device’s output can be used to recreate the
setting inside holodecks, allowing for accurate
computer simulations.
ORION MULTI-KEY (NOT WIDELY AVAILABLE)
A traditional tool of Orion merchants and pirates. Each
one appears as a short cudgel (counts as a bludgeon
in combat). Each tool can fold open, with extendable
prongs serving a variety of functions, from overriding
security systems, prying open panels, opening bottles,
and even extracting teeth.
NICK GREENWOOD
PADD (NO COST)
The ‘Personal Access Display Device’ allows crew to
access the database of their posting, tying them into the
subspace network subspace network. This gives a user
as much data access as they have clearance for, access
to subspace communication, and the ability to record
and transmit text, audio, and video recordings.
PATTERN ENHANCER (OPPORTUNITY 1)
Used to boost the resolution and strength of a transport-
er scanning beam, pattern enhancers allow transporter
systems to achieve a signal lock even with interference
from terrain or cosmic phenomena. These devices are
approximately a meter long when deployed on tripods
and require at least three to function when placed equi-
distant around a target. Each device’s power cell allows
for two transports, and additional pattern enhancers can
increase the area and number of transports.
UNIVERSAL TRANSLATOR
A standard part of Starfleet communicators since the
late 23rd century. Characters not possessing a universal
translator, either through destruction or removal of a
communicator, will be unable to converse with beings
who do not understand the character’s languages.
Obtaining a separate universal translator (Opportunity
1) provides a stand-alone unit, typically bulkier and
more powerful than communicators.
TECHNOLOGy & WEAPONS
247
CHAPTER 7
OPERATIONS
7.1 Basic Operations 250
7.2 Advanced Operations 268
CARLOS CABRERA
249
: . CHAPTER 7.1
BASIC OPERATIONS
“Roll? Roll? But you haven’t even
told me the rules yet!
- Quark
JUST LIKE THE EVENTS OF A BROAD-
cast show or movie, gameplay in Star
Trek Adventures is structured in
scenes. Each scene may cover a few
minutes or maybe an hour, during which
the characters attempt to achieve a
goal, overcome a problem, or other-
wise engage in significant activities.
Collectively, scenes are the building
blocks of a mission.
SCENES AND TRAITS
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LT. COMMANDER
BURK VEN JAXA
This chapter is all
about the core rules
used in Star Trek
Adventures. These
rules serve as the
foundation for all the
other rules in the
game, so it’s worth
spending some time
reviewing them.
ANYONE FAMILIAR WITH STAR TREK
should have an idea of what a scene
looks like: characters talk and act within
a single location toward resolving the
dramatic conflict present, switching to
a new location or new characters when
the group has resolved the conflict or de-
cides to move on. The key is that scenes
are the interesting parts of the story, and
scene transitions often skip past the
parts that aren’t interesting. Different
groups may have different standards as
to what is and isn’t interesting, so this
concept is deliberately flexible.
: . Encounters
ENCOUNTERS ARE MORE TIGHTLY
structured scenes dealing with a conflict
between two or more sides—such as
combat—in which the situation is divid-
ed into rounds and turns. During each
round, each character involved takes a
single turn, handing the action back and
forth between sides. Encounters are
detailed in Chapter 8: Conflict.
and the gamemaster can react through
the actions of NPCs and by spending
Threat to trigger logical and consequen-
tial changes in the environment and
situation. When things within that scene
have concluded, and nothing else can
be done in that place at that time, the
gamemaster should end the scene and
move on to the next one.
: . Traits
Locations, characters, and situations all
come in a variety of shapes and sizes,
and these differences are handled
in-game as traits. Each trait is a single
word or a short phrase which describes
a single significant fact about whatever
it is the trait belongs to.
A trait imposes a context upon the
world around it, and upon anything that
interacts with whatever possesses that
trait. These are useful for the gamemas-
ter in adjudicating what is and isn’t pos-
sible—as well as how difficult things
are to attempt—and for the players in
imagining the scene and figuring out
how they can interact with it.
: . Scene set-up
The gamemaster sets up the scenes
players experience, and decides when
scenes end. The players have free rein
to do as they wish within that scene,
250
CHAPTER 7
 Tracking Traits
Having any traits currently in play written down and
visible to everyone is useful. The most persistent traits
will be present on character sheets, but pretty much
anything else will last only for a single scene.
The following rough categories denote what a given trait
applies to and if a character will be impacted by that trait
applies to:
§ A situation trait applies to the current situation, but is
inherently temporary, lasting no longer than the current
scene. Any character in the scene is affected by these
traits. Darkness is an example of a situation trait.
§ A location trait applies to the current location, and is
permanent (or, at least as permanent as the location
itself). Any character in that location is affected by
location traits when they interact with some facet of
that location. Derelict Romulan Starship, Crumbling
Cavern, and Well-Stocked Sickbay are examples of
location traits.
§ A character trait applies to a character or creature.
Some of these may be permanent (or long-lasting),
such as a character’s species or reputation, but oth-
ers may be temporary, representing injuries, condi-
tions, even strong emotions. A character or creature
is naturally affected by its own character traits, and
they may also affect the characters and creatures that
interact with them.
§ An equipment trait describes a single piece of
equipment. It’s permanent—so long as the item is
functional—and can be passed freely among char-
acters as needed. An equipment trait affects any char-
acter using that item. A tricorder is an example of an
equipment trait.
Traits have no specific duration. They exist so long as
they represent something that is true. As soon as what
a trait represents stops being true, the trait vanishes (or
changes to one that reflects a new situation, such as
Darkness being replaced by Brightly-Lit). Similarly, to
remove a trait from a situation, it needs to stop being
true, typically through the actions of the characters.
When establishing a scene, the gamemaster assigns
whatever traits they feel are relevant and appropriate,
thinking of the environment and current circumstances.
The gamemaster should be open with this process and
allow players to suggest traits at the start of the scene,
and allow for traits to change as the scene unfolds.
EXAMPLE: Chief O’Brien and several other
engineers are boarding the abandoned space station
Empok Nor. The gamemaster decides the station
itself has the traits Abandoned Cardassian Station
and Power Off-line. These are both location traits:
they’re both facts about the location itself, and they
persist while they remain true. If the engineers get
the power online, the Power Off-line trait will disap-
pear, because it will no longer be true.
THE EFFECT OF TRAITS
The presence of a trait marks something as important
to a scene or situation: not only is it true, it is significant.
It’s something likely to affect the decisions and actions
characters make, and how the scene unfolds.
The effect traits have on play is to prompt the gamemas-
ter to rule a specific way on the actions taken. If you're
in a room with a Locked Door, then you can’t leave the
room until you find a way to unlock the door. If it’s Utterly
Dark, then you can’t see. If you’re a Vulcan in a desert,
you’ll find it easier to survive the hazards and perils.
If a trait would be helpful to whatever it is you’re trying to
do, then that trait may make your action easier in some
way, or otherwise produce some kind of benefit. If a trait
would be troublesome to whatever it is you’re trying to
do, then the trait may make your action more difficult, or
result in additional problems. In some cases, this may
even mean that a trait allows you to attempt something
you couldn’t normally do (such as a tricorder letting
you scan for radiation) or may prevent you attempting
something you could normally do (a collapsed tunnel
prevents you from going down a specific route), at least
until the trait is removed.
Each trait can be placed into a simple statement, such
as one of those below, and if that statement makes
sense, then it applies. If it doesn’t make sense, then it
doesn’t apply.
§ Because I am [character trait], this activity is…
§ Because of [situation or location trait], this activity is…
§ Because I have [equipment trait], this activity is…
The end of each of those statements is going to be “easi-
er,” “harder,” “possible,” “impossible,” or “unchanged.”
OPERATIONS
251
 Treknobabble
Episodes of Star Trek often include technobabble—
complicated-sounding dialogue that describes fictional
science or technology, often to explain a plot develop-
ment, or a solution to a problem, or simply to add detail
to a situation. The sheer bewildering variety of possible
technobabble makes it difficult to cover extensively; how-
ever, conveniently enough, traits are useful for handling
technobabble: a technical problem to overcome is a trait
applied to a scene, and the complex-sounding solution
(which almost always comes with some simple analogy)
is a trait created by the players to deal with a problem.
For the sake of consistency, it’s often useful to keep note
of traits that represent technobabble, so they can be
referenced later.
An engineering/science Treknobabble table is on page
266, and a medical Treknobabble table is on page 267.
252
CHAPTER 7
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
CHANGING TRAITS
During play, there are a few ways you can change traits.
Essentially, any action that would change the situation
could create, remove, or replace a trait, but in general,
a character creating a trait is trying to create some
advantage for themselves or their allies, remove a prob-
lem, or create a complication or problem for an enemy.
You may attempt a task (see opposite), typically with a
Difficulty of 2, to create a trait. The nature of the trait cre-
ated should naturally follow from the action taken. For
example, if you want to make an area Well-Lit, you need
to do something that will create light, while taking time
to clear a collapsed tunnel removes the trait.
POTENT TRAITS
If a trait has a particularly potent or intense effect—a
larger effect than those listed above—the gamemaster
can make it a potent trait, a single trait that has the
effect of many. This can be denoted simply by adding
a number after the name of the trait—this is the trait’s
potency, which is the number of identical traits it counts
as. Technically, all normal traits count as having Potency
1, but you don’t need to note this. In a situation where
Smoke may be a location trait, it may worsen and be-
come Thick Smoke 2, which counts as two traits.
When you create a trait, you may instead increase or de-
crease the potency of a trait by one: attempting to block
enemy communications, you might change a Signal
Jamming trait to Signal Jamming 2.
See page 321 for additional guidance on traits.
TASKS
CHARACTERS IN STAR TREK ADVENTURES ARE SPE-
cialists in their chosen fields, with enough breadth of
training and practical experience to ensure they can solve
problems and overcome obstacles as a matter of course.
However, there are situations where a character’s suc-
cess is in doubt or where failure or mishap are interesting.
The game presumes that, given sufficient time, the cor-
rect tools, and the ability to concentrate, a character will
be able to succeed at just about anything they set their
mind to. Failure is not a matter of inability, but rather of
insufficient time, inappropriate tools, or some manner
of obstacle or interruption. A course of action may be
deemed impossible not because the character cannot
do it, but because they don’t have the means to do it at
that moment.
A task begins with either the desire to achieve some-
thing or the desire to avoid something. A player states
what they want to accomplish, and how they intend to
get it. The gamemaster then judges, based on the situ-
ation, whether the character can achieve that goal. The
gamemaster then answers in one of three ways:
§ YES: The character can achieve that goal without
effort or challenge.
§ NO: The character cannot achieve that goal, at least,
not right now.
§ MAYBE: The character might be able to achieve their
goal, but success is uncertain.
The first two answers are easy enough to handle: the
player states their intent, the gamemaster says “yes” or
“no,” and play continues from there. The third answer is
where dice come into play. Because there’s doubt as to
the outcome, a task attempt determines what happens.
: . Attempting a Task
A task roll involves a character’s attributes, depart-
ments, and focuses, and requires rolling two or more
d20s. Attempting a task follows a specific process (see
page 257).
The gamemaster may choose to change the combina-
tions of attributes + departments on a case-by-case
basis if a situation seems like it should use a different
combination, or if a player comes up with some ingen-
ious approach that would use a different combination.
EXAMPLE: Scotty is attempting to squeeze additional
power out of the Enterprise’s engines. His target num-
ber is his Control (11) plus Engineering (4), for a target
of 15. He has a focus in Starship Propulsion and the
task has a Difficulty of 2. He rolls two d20s, rolling a 4
and a 19; the 4 scores two successes (thanks to his
focus), while the 19 scores none. With two success-
es, Scotty is successful.
 Re-rolls
Many circumstances allow a character to re-roll one or
more dice. When re-rolling dice, the player chooses the
number of dice to re-roll. They roll those dice, and the
new result replaces the original score. The new results
stand, even if they’re worse than the original results.
Some situations allow for a specific number of dice to
be re-rolled, while others allow all the dice in a pool to
be re-rolled. Players may always choose how many dice
they wish to re-roll, up to the number of dice listed—in
essence, you may always choose not to re-roll a die if
you wish to keep that result.
OPERATIONS
253
TASK DIFFICULTY
When the gamemaster calls for a task attempt, they set
a Difficulty for that task. Unless otherwise noted, most
tasks have a basic Difficulty of 1, though more routine or
straightforward tasks may have a Difficulty of 0, and more
complex or problematic tasks have higher Difficulties.
After this, the gamemaster then considers if there are any
other factors in the current scene and environment, or
affecting the characters involved, which would alter this
basic Difficulty. The factors which affect a task’s Difficulty
are commonly represented by traits in the scene.
The players should always know the Difficulty of tasks.
This allows players to determine what they’ll need to do
to have the best chance of success.
 Difficulty Zero tasks
Certain circumstances may reduce the Difficulty of a
task to 0. At other times, a task may be so simple it does
not require a dice roll. These are simple tasks. If a task
is Difficulty 0, it does not require dice to be rolled: it is
automatically successful with 0 successes, with no risk
of complications. However, because no roll is made, it
cannot generate Momentum—even bonus Momentum
from talents, particularly advantageous situations,
etc.—and the character cannot spend any Momentum
on the task. In essence, the gamemaster declares you
complete the task, no dice are rolled, and you move on
with the game.
EXAMPLE: Dr. McCoy is attempting to perform
complex heart surgery on Ambassador Sarek. This
has a basic Difficulty of 2, but there are other factors.
First, Sarek is Vulcan, and McCoy’s knowledge of
Vulcan physiology is limited, which increases the
Difficulty by 1. Second, without a Vulcan blood donor,
the operation can’t be performed at all; this complica-
tion is overcome by having Spock donate blood to the
procedure, however. Third, the Enterprise is Under
Attack, which is disruptive, increasing the Difficulty
by 1. Together, these increase the Difficulty to 4.
Fortunately, McCoy has the Enterprise Sickbay (a
location trait, reducing the Difficulty to 3) and Nurse
Chapel to assist his task attempt.
At the gamemaster’s discretion, you may roll the dice
against a Difficulty of 0 and can generate Momentum
as normal (because 0 successes are required, every
success generated is Momentum), but this comes with
the risk of gaining complications.
 Rounding
Any time you need to round an equation, round up.
: . Example Difficulties
DIFFICULTY DESCRIPTION
0 Researching a widely-known subject. Shooting a training target with a phaser or disruptor. Performing
routine maintenance and repairs.
1 Researching a specialized subject. Striking an enemy in hand-to-hand combat. Rerouting power during
an emergency.
2 Researching obscure information. Shooting an enemy with a phaser or disruptor. Repairing a
transporter pad while under fire.
3 Researching restricted information. Shooting an enemy with a phaser or disruptor in poor light.
Altering a subspace antenna to overcome interference, without the proper tools.
4 Researching classified information. Shooting an enemy in a defensive position, in poor light.
Attempting to integrate technology with the incompatible technology of another species.
5
Researching a subject where the facts have been thoroughly redacted from official records.
Shooting a small, fast-moving target in poor light. Attempting a transport while at warp, to another
vessel also at warp.
254
CHAPTER 7
 It Just Might Work!
One common element of the successes of player char-
acters is a tendency to employ creative, often bizarre
strategies to resolve seemingly impossible situations.
Consequently, the gamemaster should not only expect,
but encourage, plans that seem illogical or unwise;
though even if an illogical or unwise plan is possible,
that doesn’t mean it should be easy. The listed combi-
nations of attribute and department may not necessarily
apply to these unusual approaches, so the gamemaster
should feel free to use a different combination if the
situation calls for it. Similarly, the gamemaster should
entertain players’ suggestions for Momentum spends
and traits.
IMPROVING THE ODDS
Even the most dedicated cannot give their full effort a
hundred percent of the time; in tense situations, they
need to conserve their energy, capitalize on opportu-
nities, and be willing to take risks to triumph. Thus, the
game provides several ways for you to improve your
chances of success, by buying additional d20s to roll on
a task. Extra dice allow you to score more successes,
and thus succeed at tasks with higher difficulties or
simply generate more Momentum. However, these extra
dice always come with a cost, and which options a char-
acter chooses depends upon what costs they are willing
and able to pay.
§ MOMENTUM: The Create Opportunity (page 260)
spend allows characters to buy additional dice, rep-
resenting coordination, teamwork, and building upon
prior successes. The first extra die bought costs 1
Momentum, the second costs 2 Momentum, and the
third costs 3 Momentum.
§ THREAT: The Create Opportunity spend can be
paid for by adding to Threat (page 264) instead of
spending Momentum, representing taking risks or
acting recklessly. The first extra die bought adds 1
Threat, the second adds 2 Threat, and the third adds
3 Threat.
§ DETERMINATION: Determination doesn’t add
extra dice, but it does make the existing ones better.
When spending Determination before rolling, the
character chooses one d20 in the dice pool: that die
is considered to have already rolled a 1 (therefore
scoring a critical success, counting as 2 successes).
 Observation
One of the most common reasons players may ask to
attempt a task is to see if their characters notice or find
something that isn’t immediately obvious. These tasks
will most commonly use Insight or Reason, as those
attributes are the most associated with awareness and
comprehension. However, which department is used
should vary based on the situation.
The Difficulty of an Observation task should be low,
with success providing the bare minimum information;
Momentum can be spent to improve upon this (see Obtain
Information, page 260). For vital information, use the
Success at Cost rules (page 259).
Alternatively, if you spend Determination after rolling,
you may re-roll any number of d20s in your dice pool.
Determination may only be spent in certain circum-
stances, as described on page 262.
§ TALENTS: A few talents state a character may reduce
the cost of buying additional d20s, sometimes even
to 0, but these dice still count towards the number of
additional d20s that can be purchased.
In the gamemaster’s case, when buying bonus d20s for
NPCs, there are fewer options—the gamemaster may
spend points of Threat to add dice to a NPC’s task roll.
NPCs typically do not have Determination.
TEAMWORK AND ASSISTANCE
If the situation allows, several characters can work
together when attempting to perform a task. When more
than one character is involved in a task, one character is
the leader, and the other characters are assistants.
You may accept one assistant at no cost on any individ-
ual task. However, you may have additional assistants,
but each extra person involved creates the potential
for error: each assistant after the first either costs 1
Momentum or adds 1 Threat.
To assist with a task, the player must describe how their
character is assisting the task’s leader. If the gamemas-
ter agrees, then each assistant rolls 1d20, using their
own target number and their own focus (if any), to deter-
mine if any successes are scored. The assistants’ dice
can generate complications as usual.
OPERATIONS
255
If the task leader generates at least 1 success, all
successes generated by the assistants count toward
the task. If the task leader does not score a success,
the task fails, no matter how many successes their
assistant(s) scored.
EXAMPLE: Chief O’Brien is attempting to repair a faulty
power relay on Deep Space 9, with help from Rom.
O’Brien attempts the task, scoring 2 successes. Rom
rolls 1d20 against his own Control + Engineering,
and scores 1 success of his own, which he adds to
O’Brien’s total, making three successes in total.
Assistants do not have to use the same attribute, de-
partment, or focus as any other character involved in the
task; indeed, assistance can often be best provided by
someone contributing something different. Assistants
may only ever roll 1d20 while assisting. In combat or
other encounters, assisting a task is considered to take
up a character’s turn.
EXAMPLE: During a battle against the Borg, Captain
Picard points out a specific location on the Borg Cube
and gives the order to open fire. His specific direc-
tion is treated as assistance to Lt. Daniels’ attack;
Picard rolls 1d20 against his Reason + Command,
representing the fact that his assistance comes from
his direction and leadership. Any successes and/
or complications Picard generates are added to Lt.
Daniels’ results.
: . Opposed Tasks
When you are attempting a task against direct oppo-
sition, like swinging a bat’leth at a foe who is trying to
dodge out the way, or trying to move stealthily when
someone is searching for you, you attempt an opposed
task. The character attempting to do something is the
active character, and the other character seeking to
resist or avoid the first character’s attempts is the reac-
tive character.
When you attempt an opposed task, the reactive charac-
ter first rolls to set the Difficulty. They gather a dice pool,
rolling against their own target number as if they were
making a task roll. However, they are not rolling against
any specific Difficulty; just count how many successes
they score.
After this, the active character makes their task roll. The
Difficulty of this roll is equal to the number of successes
the reactive character scored.
256
CHAPTER 7
 Equipment
and Technology
Starfleet officers make use of a wide range of tools and
devices during their duties, and typically have access to
whatever items they need to do their jobs. Therefore, the
Difficulty of a task assumes the character has the appro-
priate tools for that task, and the task may become more
difficult—or even impossible—if circumstances dictate a
character lacks those tools.
Equipment and technology are examined in more detail
in Chapter 6: Equipment & Technology.
If the active character succeeds, they achieve their
desired goal, and can spend any Momentum generated
to improve that outcome as usual. If the active charac-
ter fails, however, the reactive character generates 1
Momentum for each success fewer than the Difficulty
scored—i.e., if they set a Difficulty of 4, and the active
character scored 2 successes, the reactive character
gets 2 Momentum—and they may spend this Momentum
immediately, as if they had succeeded at the task.
After all this has been resolved, any complications suf-
fered by either side are handled by the gamemaster.
EXAMPLE: Worf is locked in hand-to-hand combat
with a Jem’Hadar warrior, and Worf lashes out with his
mek’leth. This is an opposed task. The Jem’Hadar war-
rior has Daring 11 and Security 3, for a target number
of 14; the Jem’Hadar rolls a 6 and a 15, scoring only a
single success. Worf then rolls. He has Daring 12 and
Security 5, for a target number of 17, and is using his
focus in Mok’bara. He rolls an 8 and a 12, scoring 2
successes, enough to beat the Difficulty of 1, and to
generate 1 Momentum. After a few moments of strug-
gle, Worf forces his way past the Jem’Hadar warrior’s
defenses and brings down his foe.
EXTERNAL FACTORS IN OPPOSED TASKS
The procedure for opposed tasks assumes both sides
are on roughly equal footing, and that neither side has
any real advantages or hindrances beyond their own
abilities. This isn’t always the case.
If the opposing character has any factors which would
make things harder for them, each such factor reduc-
es the Difficulty they set by 1, to a minimum of 0. In
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
ATTEMPTING A TASK
Select an attribute and department, as well as any
applicable focus. Add the ratings for the selected
attribute and department. The total is your target number.
The gamemaster sets the task’s Difficulty. This is a number,
usually from 0 to 5. The Difficulty represents the number of
successes the player must roll to complete the task.
Build your dice pool, starting with 2d20. Add bonus d20s granted from talents and other
game effects. Add more d20s by spending Momentum or adding Threat. The first bonus
die costs 1, the second costs 2 more, and the third costs 3 more. You cannot roll more than
5d20 on any task attempt.
(Optional) Improve your chances by asking for
assistance, from either another character or the ship
(if applicable). Assistance is described on page 255.
Roll your dice pool. Each d20 that rolls equal to or less than the target number scores a success.
§ If one of your focuses applies, then each die that rolls equal to or less than the department
you’re using is a critical success, scoring 2 successes.
§ If none of your focuses apply, each die that rolls 1 is a critical success.
§ Each die that rolls a 20, or falls within the complication range, causes a complication
(see “Complications,” page 258).
If the number of successes scored equals or exceeds the task’s Difficulty, the task attempt
succeeds. If the number of successes is less than the Difficulty, the task attempt fails.
If you scored more successes than the task’s Difficulty, each extra success becomes 1
point of Momentum (see “Momentum,” page 259).
The gamemaster describes the outcome of the task, and if the
task was successful, the player may spend Momentum to improve
the result further. Then, apply the effects of any complications.
OPERATIONS
257
essence, fewer of their successes translate into difficulty
for their opponent.
If the active character has any factors which would
affect the Difficulty of their action other than the oppos-
ing character, then adjust the final Difficulty up or down
as normal.
In either case, characters in an opposed task may ac-
cept assistance from other characters on their side.
EXAMPLE: Doctor M’Benga and Nurse Chapel are
attempting to escape from a ship full of Klingon dilithi-
um miners. Faced with a desperate situation, they
each take a dose of a powerful stimulant and begin to
fight their way out. A Klingon attempts to stop Chapel;
Chapel rolls 1 success, but the stimulants count as an
extra factor in her favor, granting her an extra suc-
cess, which means the Klingon is now rolling against
a Difficulty of 2.
: . Complications
When attempting a task, each d20 that rolls a 20 creates
a complication, which comes into play once the task
has been resolved.
If you roll a 20, and you don’t want to suffer a complica-
tion, or the gamemaster doesn’t want to impose a com-
plication at this point in the scene, the complication
258
CHAPTER 7
TOBIAS RICHTER
can instead be ‘bought off’ by adding 2 Threat (see
page 265). In essence, this turns an immediate prob-
lem (the complication) into a problem for later (more
Threat).
EXAMPLE: While the Enterprise NX-01 is under
attack, Ensign Sato is attempting to convince the
captain of an unknown alien ship to help. Her initial
attempt, however, is hindered by technical issues
with the universal translator; she suffers a complica-
tion, Mistranslation. This may cause problems with
further attempts to communicate.
COMPLICATION RANGE
Some circumstances can make a task more uncertain,
though not necessarily any more difficult. These factors
increase the complication range of a task, making it
more likely that complications will occur.
A task has a complication range of 1 normally, meaning
whenever you roll a 20 on a d20, you generate a compli-
cation. Increasing the complication range by 1 means
complications occur on the result of a 19 or 20 on a d20.
Increasing the complication range by 2 means complica-
tions occur on an 18, 19, or 20, and so forth, as summa-
rized in the Complication Range table.
The complication range can never be increased to more
than 5.
: . Complication Range
COMPLICATION
RANGE
COMPLICATION
OCCURS ON…
1 20
2 19–20
3 18–20
4 17–20
5 16–20
The gamemaster may freely rule on what complication
range applies to a given task attempt, but there should
always be some justification given. A trait may provide
sufficient reason to increase a task’s complication
range, as could the gamemaster choosing to spend
Threat to represent something that distracts or inter-
feres with the task.
: . Success at Cost
Some tasks can’t really be failed outright—rather, there
is uncertainty as to whether the task can be completed
without problems. Your gamemaster may allow char-
acters to Succeed at Cost, either stating this before
the task is attempted, or providing the option after the
dice have been rolled. If this option is provided, you can
choose to succeed at a task and suffer one automatic
complication, in addition to any caused by 20s rolled.
MOMENTUM
WHENEVER YOU ATTEMPT A TASK AND GENERATE
more successes than the Difficulty, extra successes
become Momentum, a valuable resource allowing you to
improve on your success or save for the group. You don’t
begin a mission with Momentum—it only comes from
taking action!
: . Spending Momentum
The normal use for Momentum is to improve the outcome
of a successful task, such as gaining more information
from research, inflicting more damage with an attack, or
making more progress with an ongoing problem.
When you succeed at a task, the gamemaster de-
scribes what happens. You can then spend Momentum
to improve what happens, or to gain other benefits.
These complications function exactly as those generat-
ed by rolling a 20, including being able to remove them
for 2 Threat, or using them to create other effects.
Though the task has technically been successful, you
can’t spend Momentum to improve the outcome of a
task that succeeded at cost—Momentum can only be
spent if the task was truly successful.
In some cases, the ‘cost’ can be increased further, at
the gamemaster’s discretion, causing your character to
suffer more than one automatic complication on a failed
task. This should be made clear when the option to
Succeed at Cost is presented.
EXAMPLE: While preparing for an away mission to
Kiley 279, Nurse Chapel administers an epigenetic
treatment which alters the appearances of the away
team to resemble the local Kiley people. As both
Captain Pike and Lieutenant Noonien-Singh are
Human, this is relatively straightforward, but the
gamemaster rules it is more difficult with Lieutenant
Spock, due to his mixed Human and Vulcan genetics.
Chapel’s task to formulate the treatment for Spock
fails, but the gamemaster allows Chapel to Succeed
at Cost: in this case, the treatment works and Spock’s
appearance is transformed, but it will not last as long,
and the gamemaster warns that they might spend
Threat at an inopportune moment to have Spock’s
appearance revert to normal.
Momentum used in this way doesn’t need to be de-
clared in advance, and each point can be spent one
at a time as required. For example, you may spend 1
Momentum to ask the gamemaster a question, and then
decide if you want to spend any more Momentum for
more information once you’ve gotten an answer. Thus,
Momentum cannot be wasted by being used on some-
thing that wasn’t necessary.
Once a task has been resolved, any unspent Momentum
is added to the group’s pool, as described below.
Momentum that cannot be added to the group pool—
because the group pool is already full or because it is
bonus Momentum—is lost if it isn’t spent.
OPERATIONS
259
: . Common Momentum Spends
MOMENTUM SPEND EFFECT
Create Opportunity
(buy d20s)
(Immediate, Repeatable)
Before you attempt a task (but after the gamemaster sets its Difficulty), build your dice pool,
starting with 2d20. Add bonus d20s granted from talents and other game effects. Add more
d20s by spending Momentum or adding Threat. The first bonus die costs 1, the second
costs 2 more, and the third costs 3 more. You can't roll more than 5d20 on any task attempt.
Create a Trait
Keep the Initiative
(Immediate)
Obtain Information
(Repeatable)
Reduce Time
Swift Action You can spend 2 Momentum to establish a new trait in the scene (see Establishing a
Scene, page 250) or to change, increase the potency of, or remove a trait currently in
play.
A trait you create must relate to the task you just passed, and it must be something that
would result from your actions.
After taking a turn in an action scene (see Chapter 8: Conflict), instead of handing the
action to the opposing side, a character may choose to Keep the Initiative. To Keep the
Initiative, the character who has just completed their turn may spend 2 Momentum and
then hand the action to another character on their own side.
Once one side has opted to Keep the Initiative, nobody on that side may do so again until
the opposition has taken at least one turn of their own. Both player characters and NPCs
may use Keep the Initiative.
You can ask the gamemaster a single question about the scene by spending 1 Momentum.
The question must be related to the task attempted, and the gamemaster must answer
truthfully but doesn’t have to give complete information.
If there’s no information your character could determine, the gamemaster may answer
“you don’t know,” but they must refund the Momentum spent for that question.
You can spend 2 Momentum to reduce the time it takes to complete the activity
represented by the task, typically taking half the normal amount of time. You can’t use this
option during an action scene.
See also Timed Challenges, on page 333.
During your turn in an action scene, you may spend 2 Momentum to take an additional major
action. However, any task roll attempted as part of this action increases in Difficulty by 1.
Extra Minor Action During your turn in an action scene, you may spend 1 Momentum to take an additional
minor action. Each minor action may only be performed once per turn.
 Bonus Momentum
COMMON MOMENTUM OPTIONS
The following options are the most common ways to
spend Momentum in Star Trek Adventures. These
options are likely to cover most things that you’ll want to
achieve with your Momentum during normal play.
Some situations, items, and talents grant a character
bonus Momentum under specific circumstances. This is
added to the amount of Momentum the character may
spend in that circumstance. Something which grants bo-
nus Momentum may specify that it may only be used in a
specific way, such as buying d20s, increasing Difficulty,
or some other purpose.
Regardless of how it is granted, bonus Momentum
can never be saved: if it is not used when it is granted,
it is lost.
Some Momentum spends can be used immediately when
they are required, rather than waiting until a successful
task. These spends are referred to as Immediate, and
they can be used at any point in play, though most will
specify when they are used. When you use these options,
you may spend Momentum directly from the group pool
or you may pay for them by adding to Threat instead,
one for one—however much Momentum you’d normally
spend, add the equivalent amount of Threat.
260
CHAPTER 7
 Other Uses
for Momentum
Instead of using a listed Momentum spend option, be
creative when using Momentum. When you succeed
at a task and generate a lot of Momentum, think of how
that incredible success might affect the task’s immedi-
ate results, or how it could affect what happens next.
Together with your group, you may invent ways to spend
Momentum if they make sense in the context in which
you generated that Momentum. Any option you and your
gamemaster agree upon is feasible. Of course, your
gamemaster can veto proposed Momentum spends that
do not reflect the scene.
Most uses for Momentum can only be used once on
a task, or once in any given round in a conflict. Some
Momentum spends are Repeatable, which means they
can be used as many times as you want and have the
Momentum available to spend.
Note that some Momentum spends can be both
Immediate and Repeatable.
EXAMPLE: Lt. Commander Data’s scan of a spatial
anomaly generated 3 Momentum. He spends the first
point to gain additional information from his scan,
which the gamemaster provides. After this, still having
some more questions, Data spends a second point to
ask another question.
DETERMINATION
IN ADDITION TO MOMENTUM, PLAYERS HAVE AC-
cess to a special resource called Determination.
Determination reflects the fact that the player characters
are the game’s protagonists, Starfleet officers or others
with ambition, drive, and grit beyond that of most beings.
Such individuals make their own luck and shape the
Galaxy around them through their actions and decisions.
Whatever their inclination, the player characters are
naturally prominent and influential people.
Determination can be used to pull off exciting stunts,
provide an edge during tense situations, or other-
wise help to advance the story. You gain and spend
Determination from acting in accordance with your be-
liefs, represented by the character’s values. When your
 The Ebb and
Flow of Momentum
At the end of each scene, remove 1 Momentum from
the Momentum pool if possible; Momentum cannot be
saved indefinitely.
: . Saving Momentum
Any Momentum you don’t spend is saved to a group pool,
which can be added to or used by any player in the group,
representing the benefits of your collective successes.
This pool cannot contain more than 6 Momentum at a
time. Any Momentum that cannot be added to the group
pool is lost if it isn’t spent immediately.
After succeeding on a task, you may spend Momentum
from the group pool in addition to those generated
during that task. Momentum only needs to be spent
as needed, so you don’t have to choose how much
Momentum you’re spending from the group pool until
you spend it, nor does it need to be spent all at once.
EXAMPLE: Lt. Commander Data has 1 Momentum
remaining from his scan. He chooses to save it
for later, rather than spending it. It’s added to the
group pool, and can be used by someone else at a
later point.
values aid you in what you’re seeking to achieve, you
may spend Determination; while you gain Determination
when your immediate goals and your values conflict with
one another.
Values are short phrases or statements describing the
attitudes, beliefs, and principles of your character, while
Directives represent the orders and instructions provid-
ed by your organization and by your superiors.
Each player character begins each mission with
1 Determination and cannot have more than 3
Determination at any time. Any excess Determination
is immediately discarded.
OPERATIONS
261
: . Determination Spends
DETERMINATION
SPEND EFFECT
Moment of Inspiration You may spend Determination on a task roll, after the dice have been rolled, to re-roll any
number of d20s in your dice pool.
Perfect
Opportunity
You may spend Determination on a task roll—before any dice are rolled, but after you’ve
purchased any extra dice—to select a single d20 in your dice pool and set it so that it
counts as having rolled a 1 (and thus scoring a Critical Success).
Special Technique
Your character immediately gains the use of a single talent they do not possess. This
talent remains for the rest of the current scene. You must meet the prerequisites for that
talent, and the gamemaster may veto talents which make no sense for a character to
suddenly obtain for a short while. This might represent some incidental knowledge or
training the character possesses which isn’t normally relevant, or the benefits of a piece
of equipment or other circumstantial factor.
 Values and Directives
Values are short phrases or statements that describe the
attitudes, beliefs, and convictions of a character. For more
on values, see page 87.
When you want to spend Determination, you can only
do so if one of your values—or one of the mission’s
Directives—aligns with the action you’re undertaking. Your
values and Directives bolster your resolve, allowing you
to draw strength from your beliefs, so you can push your-
self further in battle or focus during an intense challenge.
Directives are not linked to a single character, but rather
apply to the group as a whole for the duration of a single
mission. Each Directive represents a guiding principle
of the fleet, such as Starfleet’s General Order 1, also
known as the Prime Directive, specific mission orders
or restrictions, or the limitations imposed by treaties
or orders. The gamemaster chooses the Directives for
each mission (though pre-written missions include their
own Directives).
Values can also hinder your character’s judgement,
making them biased, blinding them to possibilities, or
otherwise impairing their ability to confront a problem
effectively. These situations can cause you problems,
but also present opportunities to gain Determination.
Similar to values, Directives can be used positively
to spend Determination or they can impact a char-
acter negatively and allow a character to regain
Determination:
: . Spending
Determination
When you attempt a task, or are otherwise in a difficult
situation, and one or more of your values (or one of the
mission Directives) would be helpful in your current
situation, you may spend Determination.
When you spend Determination, choose one of the ben-
efits detailed in the Determination Spends table.
§ Using a Directive positively allows a character to
act with the confidence they have the support of their
organization behind their actions.
§ Suffering a complication from a Directive reflects a
reluctance to go against orders.
§ Challenging a Directive reflects a character know-
ingly disobeying orders for a meaningful reason, and
being willing to face the consequences of that choice.
EXAMPLE: Captain Spock is attempting to uncov-
er the truth behind a conspiracy. Suspecting the
Enterprise’s computers have been tampered with, he
sets about testing his hypothesis. This is a Reason +
Engineering task, using his Computers focus, with
a Difficulty of 3. Given the Difficulty and the urgency,
Spock buys an additional d20 for the task. As Spock is
motivated by his value: “Logic is the beginning, not the
end, of wisdom,” Spock may spend 1 Determination
to aid in his task, which he does to set one of his d20s
for the task to a 1, guaranteeing a critical success.
262
CHAPTER 7
: . Gaining Determination
When you attempt a task or are otherwise in a difficult
situation, and one or more of your values would make
your situation more difficult, the gamemaster may ask
you to either challenge your value, or comply with it:
EXAMPLE: The Enterprise has rescued an injured
Romulan after responding to a distress call in the
Neutral Zone. Dr. Crusher is attempting to save
the Romulan’s life, but the Romulan needs a blood
transfusion. Worf is the only member of the crew
with the correct cellular factors to help. However,
Worf despises Romulans, and this is part of his
“Proud and Honorable Klingon” value; the gam-
emaster offers Worf 1 Determination. Worf complies
with his value, and the gamemaster says that, as
his complication, Worf refuses to help the Romulan,
who dies as a result.
§ CHALLENGE: You choose to go against your value.
You cross out the challenged value, as it is no longer
as vital to the character as it once seemed, and then
continue to resolve the current task or situation. Once
finished, gain 1 Determination. At the end of the mis-
sion, alter the crossed-out value to reflect the change
in your character’s beliefs. This is described more in
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT page 166.
§ COMPLY: You choose to give in to your value, suffer-
ing a complication as a result. This complication may
make your chosen course of action more difficult, or it
may even prevent you attempting that action, instead
requiring you to try something else. Discuss with your
gamemaster how this should play out. Once finished,
gain 1 Determination.
During play, you do not have to rely on the gamemaster to
provide prompts to gain Determination; you may suggest
a situation might be a test of your character’s values.
EXAMPLE: Captain Archer, confronting a Xindi
Arboreal, finds himself moved by his value of “The
Xindi Must be Stopped.” While speaking with the
Arboreal scientist, Gralik, the gamemaster offers
Archer 1 Determination. Archer decides to challenge
his value, as he realizes not all the Xindi are in support
of their war against humanity, and he sets aside his
anger. He crosses out “The Xindi Must be Stopped,”
and will rewrite it at the end of the mission. He gains
1 Determination, which he uses immediately with his
“Seek out New Life and New Civilizations” value to
convince Gralik to help him.
EREN ARIK
OPERATIONS
263
THREAT
SIMILAR TO HOW PLAYERS GENERATE AND SPEND
Momentum, the gamemaster generates their own pool
of points to spend, called Threat. The gamemaster
spends Threat to alter scenes and empower NPCs much
as players use Momentum to empower their characters.
Threat is also a means of building tension—the larger
the Threat pool, the greater the potential danger or chal-
lenge to your characters.
While your characters don’t know about Threat, they
will have a sense of the stakes of a mission and of the
potential risks. Threat is described in full in Chapter 9:
Gamemastering.
Threat comes from action, much as Momentum does.
Player characters and NPCs alike increase Threat during
play, and the gamemaster spends that Threat to create
consequences and raise the stakes during scenes.
Threat serves as a visible “cause and effect” for the
game, with actions and consequences linked by the rise
and fall of the Threat pool.
The gamemaster begins each adventure with 2 Threat
for each player character present, though this can be
adjusted based on the tone and underlying tension of a
given adventure. If the stakes are high, the gamemaster
may choose to begin with more Threat per player char-
acter, while a calmer, quieter scenario may reduce the
gamemaster’s starting Threat.
Whenever the game mechanics say to “add X Threat,” it
means to add the listed number of points to the gam-
emaster’s Threat pool.
: . Threat and Player
Characters
Players add to Threat in a number of different ways, typ-
ically representing taking risks or allowing the situation
to escalate, including:
§ COMPLICATIONS: When you suffer a complication,
you (or the gamemaster) may choose to ignore that
complication, adding 2 Threat per complication
ignored.
§ ESCALATION: At times, the gamemaster (or the
rules) may rule that a specific action or decision risks
escalation, by making the situation more dangerous
or unpredictable. If a character performs an action
that risks escalation, they immediately add 1 Threat.
264
CHAPTER 7
 What Can I use by
Generating Threat?
You can generate Threat in place of spending
Momentum on immediate Momentum spends. That
means, once you’ve rolled your dice pool, you can only
spend the Momentum you have generated and the
Momentum you have in the group pool—you can’t gen-
erate Threat for the gamemaster to Obtain Information,
for bonus Stress, or any other Momentum spend that
isn’t Immediate.
Several of these apply primarily during action scenes,
and are described in full in Chapter 8: Conflict.
IMMEDIATE MOMENTUM SPENDS
§ BUY d20s: Add d20s to your dice pool. The first d20
adds 1 Threat, the second generates 2 Threat, and
the third generates 3 Threat.
§ KEEP THE INITIATIVE: Pass the order of play to an
ally, rather than an enemy, for 2 Threat.
Using lethal force—making an attack with the intent
to kill—is always considered escalation. Carrying
large and obvious weaponry, such as phaser rifles,
bat’leths, or similar, can also count as escalation.
§ IMMEDIATE MOMENTUM: Whenever you wish to
use an Immediate Momentum spend, such as buying
extra d20s for a task, you can choose to pay some
or all of that cost by adding Threat instead. Add 1
Threat to the gamemaster’s pool for each point of
Momentum you would have otherwise spent.
Player characters typically do not spend Threat: it is
spent to challenge the player characters and to make the
adventure more exciting.
: . Threat and the
Gamemaster
The gamemaster may add to Threat in the following ways:
§ NPC MOMENTUM: NPCS with unspent Momentum
cannot save it as player characters can: NPCs don’t
have a group Momentum pool. Instead, an NPC may
spend Momentum to add to Threat, adding 1 Threat
for every Momentum they spend.
§ THREATENING CIRCUMSTANCES: The environment
or circumstances of a new scene may be threatening
or perilous enough to warrant adding 1 or 2 Threat
to the pool automatically. Similarly, some NPCs may
generate Threat simply by arriving in the scene, in re-
sponse to changes in the situation, or by taking certain
actions. This also includes activities that escalate the
tensions of the scene, such as NPCs raising an alarm.
EXAMPLE: Captain Pike, Doctor M’Benga, and
Lieutenant Noonien-Singh are on Rigel VII for an away
mission. The environment—the entire planet—has an
Unusual Radiation trait, which is causing problems
with some of their technology, but the full effects
aren’t known. While hiking through the wilderness,
the gamemaster spends 2 Threat to have Lieutenant
Noonien-Singh suffer a complication: a Headache.
This is only a mild annoyance for her player, but
it doesn’t stay that way for long: after a while, the
gamemaster spends 2 Threat to turn that Headache
into a more severe Headache & Confusion 2 potent
trait. Over time, the gamemaster does the same to
M’Benga and Pike as well. Eventually, the gamemas-
ter spends an additional 2 Threat for each character,
leaving them with the trait The Forgetting 3 as the
culmination of all the neurological problems caused
by the radiation.
The gamemaster can spend Threat in several ways, as
detailed in the Threat Spends table.
: . Threat Spends
THREAT SPEND EFFECT
Complication Environmental Effects
and Narrative Changes
NPC Complications NPC Momentum NPC Threat Spends
Reinforcements
The gamemaster may create a complication in the form of a trait by spending 2 Threat.
This must come naturally from some part of the current situation.
The gamemaster may trigger or cause problems with the scene or environment by
spending Threat.
If an NPC suffers a complication, the gamemaster may buy off that complication by
spending 2 Threat.
The Threat pool serves as a mirror for the players’ group Momentum pool. Thus, NPCs
may use Threat in all the ways that player characters use group Momentum.
On any action or choice where a player character would normally add one or more points
to Threat, an NPC performing that same action or making that same choice must spend
an equivalent number of points of Threat.
The gamemaster may bring in additional adversarial NPCs during a scene. Minor NPCs
cost 1 Threat each, while Notable NPCs cost 2. Adversary starships cost Threat equal
to their Scale. Note that this does not apply to NPCs present at the start of the scene,
only additional NPCs who arrive while the scene is playing out, and there must be some
logical reason why those reinforcements have arrived and where they’ve come from.
OPERATIONS
265
TREKNOBABBLE
IF YOU NEED TO SOUND LIKE A TRAINED STARFLEET ENGINEER AT SOME POINT DURING A SCENE, ROLL A D20
for each column to determine what task needs to be completed and with what tool. If a result doesn’t fit your needs,
either ignore it or reroll as desired.
: . Treknobabble Generator
D20 ACTION DESCRIPTOR SOURCE EFFECT DEVICE
1 (re)initialize multiphasic thermal gravitic discriminator
2 (re)calibrate auxiliary nadion magnatomic collector
3 (de)magnetize duotronic baryon flux dampener
4 reset tertiary plasma annular intercooler
5 modify phased gravimetric ionic relay
6 overhaul secondary quantum displacement coil
7 synchronize emergency chroniton frequency (re)sequencer
8 (re)configure composite verteron conversion manifold
9 (de)scramble isolinear polaron inertial injector
10 (dis)assemble macroscopic particle valence coupling
11 decontaminate multivector interphase holographic accelerator
12 amplify auxiliary photonic field receiver
13 convert modular tachyon distortion stabilizer
14 (re)focus thermionic subspace harmonic conduit
15 (de)saturate primary neutrino (a)synchronous compensator
16 (de/re)couple master filament static capacitor
17 boost adjunct coolant gradient dynoscanner
18 nullify microscopic fluctuation phase array
19 invert complementary resonance wave subprocessor
20 (de/re)construct cyclic tetryon beam emitter
266
CHAPTER 7
MEDICAL-BABBLE
OVER THE COURSE OF THE MANY STAR TREK SERIES AND FILMS, THERE HAVE BEEN A VARIETY OF ODD, SOME-
times unique, medical conditions. These conditions were caused by many different things, both exotic and mundane,
and the treatments and cures were likewise diverse. If you find yourself in need of an illness, cause, or form of treat-
ment, roll a d20 four times, once for each column. Feel free to adjust the results as appropriate for your campaign.
: . Medical-Babble Generator
D20 ILLNESS/INJURY CAUSE PRIMARY TREATMENT SECONDARY
TREATMENT
1 Genetic unspooling Exposure to trilithium
isotope neural caliper Mind-meld
2 Body is rapidly shrinking Possessed by alien
intelligence Klingon nerve gas Omicron radiation
3 Dermal ossification Chroniton radiation delta radiation Trellium-D derivative
4 Multiple personalities Transporter accident/
malfunction neural pathway induction Delta-wave inducer
5 Accidental clone Exposure to dikironium dermal regenerator Genetic recombination
6 Accelerated aging Psychoactive plant pollen pyrithian bat droppings Tetryon radiation
7 Random organ
involuntarily harvested Dark matter nebula beta radiation Lexorin
8 Suddenly grows gills God-like alien vascular regeneration
therapy Anabolic protoplaser
9 Radiation burns Strange energies decompression chamber Enzymatic induction
10 Possessed by an alien
Telepathic contact gone
trianaline Ultraviolet radiation
intelligence
wrong
11 Hemoglobin begins to
Accidental visit to
break down rapidly
antimatter universe neutrino bombardment Cordrazine
12 Catalepsy Genetic manipulation surgical Transplant Neural stimulator
13 Split into two beings, one
good and one evil Exposure to antitime transporter pattern buffer Morphogenic enzyme
analysis
14 Rapidly aging in reverse Subspace anomaly dermaline Positron bombardment
15 Coolant poisoning Exotic microorganism sigma radiation Kelotane
16 Body is rapidly enlarging Exotic stellar radiation cerebral micro-section Isotropic restraint
17 Protomorphic genetic
expression Aggressive plant spores physiostimulator Hematic microrepair
treatment
18 Skeleton transforming
into different material Organ-legging pirates serotonin Ethorin pulse
19 Neural pattern
breakdown Exposure to time crystals hyperonic radiation Adrenaline
20 Loss of emotional control Unexpected side effect
biogenic compound
of alien medication
therapy Myelin regenerator
OPERATIONS
267
: . CHAPTER 7.2
ADVANCED OPERATIONS
“Have I ever mentioned you play a very
irritating game of chess, Mr. Spock?
- Captain James T. Kirk
THIS CHAPTER DETAILS TWO ADDI-
tional game mechanics the gamemaster
can use to structure larger problems or
objectives: challenges and extended
tasks. Gamemasters can apply these
rules to situations to make them more
engaging, but they may not be suitable
for every scene.
§ A challenge groups together several
related tasks which must be com-
pleted in a particular order, or which
affect one another in a specific way.
§ An extended task is a single activity
which takes multiple task rolls to com-
plete, measuring both ongoing pro-
gress and a series of breakthroughs;
it’s ideal for complex problems that
need to be overcome when under
pressure or in a hazardous situation.
These options offer a chance for your
whole group to get involved in resolving
shared goals and problems, assisting one
another, or all attempting separate tasks
while working towards a collective goal.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
LT. COMMANDER
BURK VEN JAXA
As with engineering
principles in general,
once you understand
the basics, you can
then build upon and
expand those basics to
take on more advanced
tasks and projects.
The rules in this game
are no different. You
learned the essentials
in the previous chapter;
now you can take that
baseline and expand it
into attempting more
involved challenges
and extended tasks.
Your gamemaster will
use these mechanics
from time to time
to structure larger
problems for you
characters to solve,
so it’s worth gaining
an understanding of
how these advanced
concepts work.
CHALLENGES
A CHALLENGE IS ANY SITUATION
requiring multiple tasks to complete.
There are different ways to resolve a
challenge, depending on its nature and
how the gamemaster wants to present
the situation. These different options
can be combined as the gamemaster
sees fit, providing a toolbox for structur-
ing a wide range of different problems
for you to overcome.
A challenge consists of two or more
different key tasks. These tasks are the
core activities that must be complet-
ed to overcome the challenge. Once
all the key tasks have been complet-
ed successfully, the challenge is
complete.
At the gamemaster’s discretion,
you can attempt other tasks during
a challenge—these won’t directly
contribute to overcoming the chal-
lenge, but they can be used to remove
complications, create new traits, gen-
erate Momentum, or otherwise gain
some other useful benefits.
 Group
Challenges
Group challenges are intended to be
completed through collective effort,
rather than by a single person, often
because it takes place over a relatively
short space of time and is too much
work for one character.
In a group challenge, whenever a
character attempts or assists a task,
they may not assist in other tasks during
the remainder of the challenge, and any
other tasks they attempt during the chal-
lenge increase in Difficulty by 1. This
Difficulty increase is cumulative.
268
CHAPTER 7
CHALLENGE EXAMPLE
B’ELANNA TORRES NEEDS TO RESTART THE
Voyager’s warp core in a hurry. There are three specific
activities to be performed—bring the warp core up to
the right temperature and pressure, inject matter and
antimatter to start the reaction, and adjust the matter/
antimatter flow rate to create a sustained reaction—and
these tasks must be performed in that specific order.
: . Time Pressure
Adding a form of timer to a challenge, extended task, or
other situation is a classic way to increase tension and
make a situation more exciting. When using time pres-
sure, it can be helpful to break down the time involved
into practical units. To do this, the gamemaster deter-
mines an interval: this is a set period of time which fits
the actions being taken during the challenge or extend-
ed task. Some challenges may deal with tasks that take
hours or even days of work, while others may focus on
shorter tasks, only lasting 15 minutes or half an hour.
The gamemaster should also determine how much time
is available to complete the challenge, as a number of
intervals, and what happens when that time runs out.
KEY TASK 1
Prepare the Warp Core
§ Bring the warp core up to an appropriate tem-
perature and pressure, a Difficulty 2 Control +
Engineering task.
§ Success allows you to continue to Key Task 2.
§ Failure allows you to Succeed at Cost: you may
continue to Key Task 2, but a trait, Improper Start-Up
is created.
Typically, each task attempted takes two intervals to
attempt as standard, whether it succeeds or fails (two in-
tervals means it’s easier to alter how long the task takes).
You may spend 2 Momentum on a successful task to
reduce this by one interval. On a failed task, you may
add 2 Threat to reduce the time taken by one interval,
representing cutting your losses and giving up on the
failure early.
The gamemaster may use complications to make
attempted tasks take longer, adding one interval per
complication; for this reason, tasks under time pressure
often Succeed at Cost (the task isn’t failed, it just took
longer than planned). This applies to any tasks attempt-
ed during the challenge.
KEY TASK 2
Initial Fuel Injection
§ Inject matter and antimatter into the warp core to
start the reaction, a Daring or Control + Engineering
task with Difficulty 3. The Difficulty increases by 1 if
you have the Improper Start-Up trait.
§ Success allows you to continue to Key Task 3.
§ Failure requires that you attempt this task again.
If different parts of the challenge can be attempted in
parallel, the gamemaster can also use intervals to de-
termine who is and who isn’t busy at any given moment.
This works well as a resource and people management
problem, especially if the gamemaster varies the num-
ber of intervals individual tasks take to complete.
KEY TASK 3
Stabilize Reaction
§ Adjust the injection rate of both matter and antimatter
into the warp core, to create a sustained reaction, a
Control + Engineering task with Difficulty 2.
§ Success means that the challenge is completed and
the warp core is restarted successfully.
§ Failure requires that you attempt this task again.
VARIED INTERVALS
As standard, a task takes two intervals to attempt, before
adjustments for Momentum spent, Threat paid, and
complications suffered. However, this does not have to
be the case: the gamemaster may decide that an espe-
cially complex activity may take more than two intervals
to attempt.
In this case, a successful task allows the character to
spend 2 Momentum per interval reduced, down to a
minimum of 1, and characters cutting their losses on a
failed task may reduce the time taken by 1 interval for
every 2 Threat they add, down to a minimum of 1.
OPERATIONS
269
VARIABLE TIME LIMIT
Sometimes, a time limit represents something that will
happen at a specific time, unless the characters can
successfully avoid it, such as attempting to defuse a
bomb before it detonates.
However, other time limits may represent something
that can be delayed or avoided: perhaps the arrival of
a guard, messenger, or other troublesome person. In
these situations, characters may attempt tasks in order
to increase the time limit.
A successful task adds one interval to the remaining
time, plus an additional interval for every 2 Momentum
spent. Complications may reduce this by 1 interval
each, and a failure with a complication, at the gam-
emaster’s discretion, may mean that the remaining time
is actually reduced, as the delaying tactics have the
opposite effect.
270
CHAPTER 7
MARTIN SOBR
EXAMPLE: Motak, son of Klaar, is trying to defuse a
bomb planted aboard a Klingon space station by cow-
ardly Romulan infiltrators. There are three key tasks
involved in defusing this bomb—opening the casing,
isolating the warhead, and disabling the detonator—
but just as important, the bomb is on a timer and will
explode in a few minutes. The gamemaster decides
that this is a timed challenge, as the bomb will deto-
nate in 6 minutes, and sets an interval of a minute, with
each task taking 2 intervals (two minutes).
Motak’s first task, to remove the casing, is success-
ful, and he scores enough Momentum to reduce the
time taken down to 1 interval, so he has 5 minutes
remaining. For his next task, Motak fails, and suffers
a complication. The gamemaster allows Success at
Cost: the warhead is isolated, but it took longer than
expected, using up four of the remaining intervals
(two initially, +1 for each complication). With only
one interval remaining—only one minute left—Motak
needs to finish this quickly, or be inside the blast
radius as the bomb detonates…
EXTENDED TASKS
EXTENDED TASKS CAN BE USED TO REPRESENT LARG-
er or more complex problems which the player characters
must face while under some other pressure or facing some
kind of peril. Extended tasks represent the kinds of activity
that, if there were no pressure or peril, would be an
ordinary task, and may not even require a roll, but they’re
just difficult enough that completing them in a hurry, or
during a dangerous situation (or both) requires tasks.
Extended tasks have a progress track, which are meas-
ures of how much effort they will take to overcome. To
complete an extended task, player characters attempt
individual tasks; each successful task allows you to mark
off one or more spaces in the progress track.
Guidance on how the gamemaster can create and use
extended tasks is in GAMEMASTERING on page 329.
Extended tasks include the following elements:
§ PROGRESS TRACK: Each extended task has a
progress track, which shows how much effort is
involved. The extended task is completed when the
progress track is full.
§ IMPACT: When you succeed at a task, mark off spac-
es on the progress track equal to your Impact. Your
Impact is typically equal to the department you used
for the task—that is, if you used Engineering for the
task, your Impact is equal to your Engineering rating.
This may be modified further, by the extended task’s
resistance, talents, and other circumstances.
§ DIFFICULTY: An extended task will state a specific
Difficulty. This is the Difficulty of any tasks attempted
against that extended task. Other factors, such as
traits present in the scene, can affect this Difficulty.
§ RESISTANCE: Some extended tasks are particularly
arduous to overcome, and making any progress is
slow. Your Impact is reduced by an amount equal to
the extended task’s Resistance.
: . Attempting an
Extended Task
Whenever you work towards an extended task, you
attempt a task. If you succeed at this task (or are allowed
to Succeed at Cost), follow additional steps to see how
you progress.
1. MAKE A TASK ROLL: Resolve a task, as normal (de-
scribed on page 257), against the extended task’s
Difficulty.
2. DETERMINE IMPACT: Your Impact is equal to the
department used in your task roll, which may be mod-
ified further by talents or other factors. If your task roll
was assisted by the ship, then you may use the ship’s
department instead.
§ RESISTANCE: If the extended task has any
Resistance, reduce your Impact by 1 for each point
of Resistance, to a minimum of 1.
3. APPLY IMPACT: Mark spaces on the progress track
equal to your Impact. If the progress track is filled by
this, then the extended task is completed.
Momentum generated on tasks can be used in all the
normal ways, but there is a Momentum spend specific to
extended tasks:
§ ADDITIONAL PROGRESS (Repeatable): During an
extended task, add 1 to your Impact for 2 Momentum.
Similarly, a complication on an extended task may re-
duce your Impact by 1 for each complication suffered.
 Extended
Consequences
Just as an extended task represents a problem that
needs to be overcome, the gamemaster can use a mod-
ified form of the rules to represent a growing problem
that needs to be avoided.
An extended consequence is structured similarly to
an extended task, but “in reverse”—failed actions and
complications cause setbacks instead of breakthroughs.
These are described fully in GAMEMASTERING on
page 331.
OPERATIONS
271
: . Breakthroughs
Normally, an extended task doesn’t change when you
mark off spaces on the progress track. At the gamemas-
ter’s discretion, however, a progress track can include
breakthroughs. These are points along the progress
track which alter the nature of the extended task.
EXAMPLE EXTENDED TASK PROGRESS TRACK
WITH BREAKTHROUGHS
An extended task has two breakthrough spaces. The first
will be halfway along the track (on the 6th space if the
progress track is 12 spaces long, for example), and if the
track is an odd number of spaces, round up (so a progress
track of 9 has the first breakthrough on the fifth space).
The second breakthrough is three-quarters of the way
along the track: take the spaces left after the first break-
through, and the breakthrough will be halfway along that
remaining section (again, rounding up as needed).
EXAMPLE: Lieutenant Ortegas is piloting the
Enterprise through a spatial anomaly. The gam-
emaster decides that this is an extended task with a
progress track of 12, Difficulty 3, and Resistance 2.
The gamemaster knows the situation will change as
Ortegas makes progress and the extended task is giv-
en breakthroughs. The first breakthrough is halfway
along the track, reached after filling 6 spaces, and at
this point the Difficulty increases by 1, as the anomaly
becomes more difficult to navigate. The second is
three-quarters of the way along the track, reached
after filling 9 spaces. Upon reaching this point, the
Resistance is reduced to 1, as the path to leaving
becomes clear.
When you mark off a breakthrough space, the situation
changes in some way. The gamemaster determines
if this change is good for you, bad for you, or merely
different. See page 330 for examples of breakthrough
effects.
EREN ARIK
272
CHAPTER 7
EXTENDED TASK EXAMPLES
EXTENDED TASK EXAMPLE 1
Imminent Danger
The Enterprise NX-01 is attacked by a cloaked mine from
an unknown aggressor, which has attached itself to the
ship’s hull. Lieutenant Reed heads outside the ship in an
EV suit to defuse the bomb.
EXTENDED TASK EXAMPLE 2
Long-term Project
Aboard the U.S.S. Enterprise, Doctor M’Benga is secretly
working to try to cure his daughter’s cygnokemia, a
rare and terminal disease. This will take a considerable
amount of time, and even with Rukiya suspended in a
transporter buffer to limit the disease’s progression,
M’Benga may not be able to find a treatment in time.
Because of the complexity of the device, and the dan-
ger of the situation, the gamemaster determines that
this is an extended task, with a progress track of 16, a
Resistance of 1, and a base Difficulty of 3. The mine has
various self-defense mechanisms, so any failed task will
result in a dangerous reaction from the mine. Reed has
Control 10, Security 4, and focuses in both Explosives
and Extra-Vehicular Activity, so his Impact is 4.
Reed attempts his first task, using his Control 10 +
Security 4, and his focus of Explosives, and buys two
extra d20s with some saved Momentum. Rolling 4, 7, 12,
and 13, he scores five successes, completing the first
task and scoring 2 Momentum. Reed reduces his Impact
to 3 due to the Resistance of 1 but spends 2 Momentum
to increase it back up to 1, so four spaces are marked on
the extended task’s track.
This is an extended task, but worked on as a long-
term project over several missions. Once per mission,
M’Benga can attempt a task towards this goal. The
gamemaster says that this has a progress track of 20,
3 Resistance, and a base Difficulty 3: this is a serious
problem to overcome, and making progress is difficult.
Further, the gamemaster has an extended consequence
(essentially a negative extended task, representing a
problem worsening) for Rukiya’s condition, and each
time she’s brought out of the transporter buffer, there’s
a secret chance that a few spaces are marked off on
that track.
Before Reed can continue, however, Ensign Mayweather
attempts to move the ship to safety, but suffers a com-
plication which disturbs the mine, making things more
difficult for Reed.
During most missons, M’Benga’s work on this is an
incidental activity, something done between game ses-
sions or “off-camera” as something he’s working on in
spare moments among the other action. However, after
a mission to Majalis, M’Benga has obtained some addi-
tional research and assistance in his project. M’Benga
attempts his task, and the gamemaster provides a bonus
because of the help M’Benga received, increasing
M’Benga’s Impact and allowing him to mark off a greater
number of spaces on the progress track.
Reed makes another task, now against Difficulty 4, but
this time he fails. A spike shoots from the mine into the
hull, impaling Reed’s leg in the process, leaving him
injured and unable to continue. As Reed can no longer
reach the mine to defuse it, Captain Archer must venture
out to both defuse the mine and save Lieutenant Reed.
OPERATIONS
273
CHAPTER 8
CONFLICT
8.1 Prepare for Battle 276
8.2 Social Conflict 279
8.3 Personal Conflict 284
8.4 Starship Conflict 294
TOBIAS RICHTER
275
: . CHAPTER 8.1
PREPARE FOR BATTLE
“We’re not here to make enemies.
But just because we’re not looking for a fight,
doesn’t mean we’ll run away from one.
- Captain Jonathan Archer
WHILE THE CULTURES COMPRISING
the Federation have moved beyond the
divisive and destructive wars of their
pasts, other spacefaring civilizations in
the known Galaxy have not. Strife and
conflict remain present threats to peace-
ful exploration and discovery. Wherever
two intelligent beings exist together,
there will be differences of opinion, and
while a peaceful resolution is preferred,
one is not always possible.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
COMMANDER
XANTHUS
TH'RAVIQ
Quiet your minds and
listen with intent. I am
Commander Xanthus
th’Raviq, first officer of
the U.S.S. Challenger
and your guide through
this chapter on conflict
in its many forms.
Before discussing
each type, an overview
of how conflict is
structured follows.
Read on and remain
vigilant.
This chapter deals with various types
of conflict characters may face during a
game session: social conflict, personal
conflict, and starship conflict.
§ SOCIAL CONFLICT: Deals with
resolving disputes through personal
interaction. This can take a wide va-
riety of forms, ranging from simple
deceptions to achieve short-term
goals to protracted negotiations
over the fate of worlds. Social con-
flict is detailed in page 279.
§ PERSONAL CONFLICT: Deals with
the use of violence to achieve an
objective. Characters may engage
in combat willingly, or they may
be forced to defend themselves.
Starfleet officers are taught there are
alternatives to fighting, and finding
ways to prevent or end combats
are just as important as having the
means to defend themselves and
others. Personal conflict is detailed in
on page 284.
§ STARSHIP CONFLICT: Deals with
the use of starships and their power-
ful armaments and defenses, either to
protect an interest or oppose an ad-
versary. Starfleet nominally operates
in a defense-first perspective, firing
only when fired upon or when there is
no other recourse. Other spacefaring
civilizations operate with a similar
philosophy, though not all do. Some,
like the Klingons, find honor and glory
in direct combat, while others prefer
to use their mighty spacecraft to
exert their influence or display their
strength. Starship conflict is detailed
on page 294.
276
CHAPTER 8
CONFLICT STRUCTURE
THE SEQUENCE OF EVENTS IN ANY TYPE OF CON-
flict is split into rounds and turns. In a round, each char-
acter takes a single turn, during which each character
can attempt a single major action and several minor
actions. The round ends when all characters present in
the scene have taken a turn, if they can.
 Keeping the Initiative
At the end of your turn, you can spend 2 Momentum
(Immediate) to Keep the Initiative, handing the action to
another player character instead. A character who takes
a turn due to keeping the initiative must hand the next
turn over to the opposition. In any case, no character
may take more than one turn per round in a conflict.
At the start of any conflict, the gamemaster chooses a
character to take the first turn. The choice is based on
the following:
§ PLAYER CHARACTERS: By default, the gamemaster
chooses a single player character to take the first
turn. This may be an obvious choice, based on events
that built up to the start of the conflict. If there is any
uncertainty, the gamemaster selects the player char-
acter with the highest Daring.
§ NON-PLAYER CHARACTERS (NPCs): If the NPCs
have an obvious reason to take the first turn, (e.g.,
they have ambushed the player characters) the gam-
emaster can select an NPC to take the first turn.
§ THREAT SPEND: If there is doubt as to who should
act first, the gamemaster can spend 1 Threat to allow
an NPC to take the first turn.
EXAMPLE: Three Starfleet player characters are
ambushed by a pair of Jem’Hadar soldiers. The
Jem’Hadar are concealed by their Shrouding ability,
so the gamemaster determines they go first. The
gamemaster chooses the Jem’Hadar leader to take
the first turn, killing one of the Starfleet officers
in the process. After this, the action passes to
the Starfleet officers. One acts, and generates 2
Momentum from her task, choosing to Keep the
Initiative and pass to another Starfleet officer, who
acts, and then passes to the Jem’Hadar again. As all
the (surviving) Starfleet characters have acted and
there is one Jem’Hadar remaining, that Jem’Hadar
acts and finishes the round. The next round begins
with one of the Starfleet officers.
: . Turn Order
Once you have completed your turn—attempted a
single major action and any minor actions—the action
passes to the opposing side (typically the gamemaster),
who chooses a single NPC to act next. Once that NPC
has taken their turn, play goes back to the players, who
decide which of the player characters left to act takes
the next turn.
When you suffer Stress, the severity of the conse-
quence—usually a number between 1 and 5—tells you
how much Stress you must endure: mark that amount of
Stress on your Stress Track, like so:
STRESS TRACK EXAMPLE
: . Stress
Every main character, and some supporting characters,
have a limited ability to withstand stress, resist conse-
quences, and avoid injuries during tense or dangerous
situations.
A character can withstand a maximum amount of Stress
equal to their Fitness attribute; your choice of species,
talents, and other factors may affect this maximum.
Each time your character faces a consequence, you may
choose to suffer Stress instead.
If you can’t endure that amount of Stress without
going over your maximum, suffer whatever Stress
you can (filling your Stress Track) and suffer a compli-
cation, representing some additional problem faced
during the conflict.
There may be other circumstances which cause you
to suffer Stress. Exposure to extreme environments—
intense heat or cold, or thin atmospheres—as well as
physical fatigue, starvation, dehydration, sleep depriva-
tion, poison, radiation, diseases, or substance withdraw-
al can all inflict Stress, at the gamemaster’s discretion.
CONFLICT
277
FATIGUE
When you have suffered your maximum Stress, you are
Fatigued. You can continue to act, but your body and
mind are struggling and you are far from your best.
When you are Fatigued, you cannot suffer more Stress,
and you suffer +1 Difficulty on all task rolls. Further,
select one of your attributes: while Fatigued, you auto-
matically fail any task using that attribute. That attribute
is shut down.
RECOVERING STRESS
Starfleet officers and other characters lead intense, chal-
lenging, and often stressful lives. However, managing
the stresses of such a life, and having ample time and
opportunity to rest and recuperate, is a necessary part of
an effective and happy crew.
A character can recover Stress in several ways. Each
time you recover 1 Stress, clear one marked space on
your Stress Track. If you’re Fatigued, you can only recov-
er from Stress by resting, or if an ally helps you. Ways to
recover from Stress include:
§ MOMENTUM: After a successful task, you may
spend 2 Momentum to remove 1 Stress (Repeatable)
from yourself or one ally who can hear you. A charac-
ter cannot remove more than 3 Stress in this way on
any single task.
§ REST: You can recover from Stress outside of conflict
by spending time resting and relaxing:
§ A breather takes a few minutes, during which you
stop all strenuous activity, and perhaps grab a quick
bite to eat or something to drink. Recover 4 Stress.
§ A break takes at least half an hour and up to a
couple of hours. This may involve a modest meal,
or taking some personal time for recreation, such
as playing a game, reading, or engaging in creative
pursuits. Recover 8 Stress.
§ Sleep or a similar extended period of rest takes
several hours, typically somewhere comfortable
and quiet, and is normally accompanied by a meal
and/or something to drink before or after sleep.
Some characters, depending on species, may
sleep less, but supplement this time with medita-
tion or other form of waking rest. Recover all your
Stress, up to your normal maximum.
278
CHAPTER 8
 NPCs and Stress
The rules for Stress apply to player characters.
Supporting characters and NPCs are treated differently.
A supporting character does not have Stress under nor-
mal circumstances. A supporting character who has one
value has maximum Stress equal to half their Fitness
(rounded up). A supporting character with two or more
values has maximum Stress calculated as if they were a
main player character.
NPCs do not have Stress. Notable and Major NPCs may
spend Threat to avoid consequences. They cannot be
Fatigued and cannot reach maximum Stress. The cost
to avoid Stress is the same for NPCs as for player char-
acters, but paid using Threat.
§ A Notable NPC may spend Threat to avoid a conse-
quence or injury once per scene.
§ A Major NPC may spend Threat to avoid consequenc-
es or injuries as often as they wish (and have Threat
to spend).
The gamemaster may adjust the amount of Stress recov-
ered by resting depending on the conditions and quality
of rest. Poor conditions are usually a reason to do so—
needing to rest in the wilderness, with limited rations
and poor shelter may cut down the amount to half its
normal value. Increasing the amount of Stress recovered
often comes from improved quality conditions, such as
exceptional food and drink or quality time spent with
friends and loved ones.
At the gamemaster’s discretion, Stress can be recov-
ered in other ways, but there should always be a cost.
Rest takes time, which could be spent doing something
else. Attempting to find alternatives to rest, such as by
using chemical stimulants, may have side effects or
other consequences.
: . CHAPTER 8.2
SOCIAL CONFLICT
“Don’t you know who I am? I’m your nemesis,
I’m your nightmare. I’m the Butcher of Gallitep!
- Aamin Marritza
IN STARFLEET, AN OFFICER’S ABILITY
to deal with people is an important
part of their successes and their
failures. Officers of all kinds, but those
aspiring to command especially,
need to be able to read and deal with
people both individually and collec-
tively. This isn’t limited only to their
subordinates and their superiors, but
also to strangers—a Starfleet officer
represents all of Starfleet, and so some
basic understanding of diplomacy is a
necessity.
Social conflict is the collective term for
tasks and challenges resolved through
deception, diplomacy, bargaining, intim-
idation, and a range of other social skills.
Not all personal interactions are social
conflict, but all social conflict is driven
by interactions, especially those where
each side has different goals or may not
wish to yield to the desires of another.
At the heart of social conflict is a desire
or goal, which takes the form of a
request: one side wants something, and
the other side is either able to grant that
request, or they are standing in the way
of that goal. It comes down to one char-
acter asking another a question.
There are a few different responses to
that question, and the character being
asked may respond in one of two ways:
§ YIELD: The character receiving
the request agrees to it, and grants
that request as far as they are able.
A character won’t inconvenience
themselves to do this, nor will they
do more than is reasonably neces-
sary to help. This is automatic and
requires no task.
§ RESIST: The character receiving
the request refuses to grant it.
Regardless, the character denies the
request outright, but they may face
consequences for resisting.
Regardless of any other consequences,
if a character resists a request in a social
conflict, then that request cannot be
made again without being changed, or
without some other change of context.
As persuasion is driven by context,
what is impossible in one situation may
be feasible in another. It may be useful
to break up a goal into smaller, more
reasonable requests, each resolved
separately, pursuing a greater objective
piece by piece.
This is also where social tools come in.
Social tools allow a character to alter the
context or circumstances of persuasion,
normally in the form of applying traits
or other factors, and they can be used
individually or collectively to shape a
social conflict.
During a social conflict, each side may
have different goals, meaning that each
side engages in their own actions to
further those goals. Even in something
as seemingly one-directional as an
interrogation, the interrogator will be
trying to get information, while the
interrogated party may have a goal of
their own, such as trying to prove their
own innocence.
COMMANDER
XANTHUS
TH'RAVIQ
More battles are
won and lost through
words than by physical
prowess or proper
positioning. The ability
to talk yourself or
someone else into or
out of conflict is every
bit as important as
knowing when to parry
or when to launch
a counteroffensive.
Outmaneuver your
opponent across the
negotiation table and
you’ll save lives out
there. Read on to learn
more about social
conflict, perhaps the
most frequent form of
conflict you’ll face.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
CONFLICT
279
: . Resisting Persuasion
If a character resists when faced with a request, this
becomes an opposed task. The asking character first
rolls an appropriate combination of attribute + depart-
ment to set the Difficulty. The Difficulty can be altered by
factors such as traits like deception, evidence, intimida-
tion, or negotiation.
The resisting character rolls in response, using which-
ever combination of attribute + department makes the
most sense given the circumstances.
 Rules and Roleplaying
Social conflict is meant to be a mixture of roleplayed
discussion and game mechanics—you describe or act
out your character’s parts of the conversation, and the
gamemaster replies as an NPC and uses that exchange
to adjudicate the rules (the Difficulty of tasks, what
attributes and departments are appropriate, what social
tools are in play).
Specific combinations of attribute and department don’t
exist for any of the options in this section, and that’s de-
liberate. These things should be determined by you and
the gamemaster depending entirely on the scene and its
circumstances, and your roleplay.
Creative gamemasters may use the rules for challenges
(page 332), or extended tasks (page 329), to expand
the scope of a social conflict. A challenge made up of
several Persuade tasks can easily represent different
stages of a negotiation or a trial, culminating in a larger
outcome, while using extended tasks for part of a social
conflict could be valuable when trying to defuse a crisis or
other high-stakes situation, where time is of the essence,
or the wrong word could spell disaster. And, as noted later
in this chapter, there’s nothing to prevent you making use
of social conflict rules in the middle of combat.
In addition, a player character and NPC can go back and
forth implementing social tools against each other until
one side successfully ‘defeats’ their opponent.
EXAMPLE: After being captured, Captain Jean-Luc
Picard is interrogated by Gul Madred. Over the course
of Picard’s imprisonment, Madred uses deception
and intimidation to break down Picard’s willpower,
finally managing to fill the captain’s Stress track and
convincing him that he sees five lights instead of the
actual four.
280
CHAPTER 8
§ If the asking character wins, the resisting character
may either give in to the asking character’s request,
or they may resist by suffering Stress. The severity
of this (the amount of Stress it costs) is equal to the
number of successes scored by the asking character.
The asking character may increase this severity by 1
by spending 2 Momentum (Repeatable).
§ If the resisting character wins, the request is not
granted, and there is no further effect.
: . Social Tools
Social tools are the methods by which you can alter the
context and circumstances of a social conflict, moving
things in your favor. Each social tool is an action, and
they can be used individually or collectively to shape a
social conflict.
DECEPTION
Falsehoods and deceit can be valuable tools, and
honorable if the ends are honorable too—but lies are
dangerous. Deception can be used by itself to make a
request seem more reasonable or palatable, or it can
be used in conjunction with other tools to create a
more significant impact. However, effective deception
requires skill, cunning, and an understanding of who is
being lied to.
Deception is always an opposed task. The character
creating the deception first rolls to set the Difficulty.
They gather a dice pool, rolling against their own target
number as if they were making a task roll. However, they
are not rolling against any specific Difficulty; just count
how many successes they score. The person attempting
to see through the deception gathers their dice pool
and rolls against their target number. If they score more
successes, they are not deceived
Successfully deceiving someone convinces them of
something that is not true, creates a trait that repre-
sents the lie they now believe, and will shape their future
actions accordingly.
Deception can be used to establish lies in preparation
for future Persuade tasks. Empty threats can intimidate
a foe with a peril they believe is real, and history is full
of scams, cons, and tricks where people bargained with
things they didn’t own. The problem with Deception
is that it’s all a lie. If the target discovers they were
deceived, they will hesitate to trust your character in
future, and may even seek retribution—in effect, you
lose the trait you created and suffer a complication in its
CARLOS CABRERA
place. Further, any complications suffered while estab-
lishing a lie may reveal flaws in your deception, making
the target suspicious.
Successful Deception also adds 1 Difficulty per suc-
cessful lie to the severity after a Persuade opposed
task is rolled. However, it also increases the deceiver’s
complication range by 1 for each lie as well, as lies can
become entangled and complicated.
EXAMPLE: Freshly recovered from the rapid aging
he had been suffering from, Kirk retakes command
of the Enterprise as Romulans move to attack.
Outnumbered and outgunned, the Enterprise can’t
fight its way from the situation, even with Kirk back
in command. Kirk, remembering that one of their
encrypted channels has recently been broken by
the Romulans, orders a message to be broadcast,
announcing the vessel will use its “Corbomite
Device” to self-destruct. The lie is somewhat im-
plausible, but the Romulans don’t know Starfleet
knows the encrypted channel has been broken, so
they have little reason to suspect it’s a lie. Kirk uses
Presence + Command and rolls 3 successes. The
gamemaster rolls for the Romulans using Insight +
Command, who must now roll 3 successes to see
past the ruse. They roll only 2 successes and fail. Kirk
creates a complication for the Romulans: “Believe the
Corbomite device ruse.” The Romulans, believing the
threat of the fictional device, choose to withdraw.
EVIDENCE
The counterpoint to deception is Evidence—offering
something that provides certainty and proof of your
claims. In many cases, providing evidence may be a
straightforward affair, automatically successful, but con-
vincing someone the evidence is legitimate may be diffi-
cult, particularly if that person expects deception, which
may set a Difficulty for a task. Each piece of evidence is
a trait, either allowing you to attempt a Persuade task or
decreasing the Difficulty by 1.
Evidence can be used in conjunction with any of the
other social tools, and their use is often the driving force
of those tools. Providing proof of your ability to carry out
a threat can be vital when intimidating someone, giving
evidence of your ability to pay during negotiations can
CONFLICT
281
 Deception Against Player Characters
Player characters may not be receptive to NPCs lying to
them. This can make the deception part of social conflict
tricky to use against player characters, particularly as
picking up the dice and attempting a task can signal an
adversary is lying, regardless of the result.
In these situations, there are two possible approaches:
§ Keep NPC lies secret during play, and let the
player decide if they think an NPC is lying to them
rather than rolling. If they suspect deceit, let them
attempt a task to see if their character notices
anything. If the players ask to roll too frequently—
like asking for a task with everything said by every
NPC—then treat suspicion as escalation, so each
time they attempt a task to find if an NPC is lying, it
adds 1 Threat, as NPCs notice and are insulted by
the unfair scrutiny.
§ Play the rules straight, with the players knowing
things their characters cannot always detect. It may
be worth occasionally invoking values negatively, es-
sentially offering Determination to players to convince
them to play along with an NPC’s lie.
smooth things along, and even deception can benefit
from the right forged documentation if it helps make the
lie more believable.
Each relevant piece of evidence the target is willing
to accept also adds 1 to the severity after a Persuade
opposed task.
INTIMIDATION
A direct and crude method of coercion is to in-
spire fear, doubt, and uncertainty in your opponent.
Intimidation uses threats to compel someone into
action by convincing others that their non-compliance
will be met with force.
EXAMPLE: Confronted by the unenviable situation of
being worshipped as a god by the Mintakan people,
Picard chooses to bring one of their number, Nuria,
aboard to try to disprove their belief. Nuria rolls a
Reason + Command task and scores 3 successes.
In addition, she has the traits: Pre-warp Species and
Never Seen Anything Like This, which adds 2 to the
severity of this task. Picard must roll 5 successes to
convince her that he is not a god.
Intimidating someone is an opposed task, with the
Difficulty of each task based on the relative perceived
strengths of each side—it is easier to intimidate, and to re-
sist intimidation, from a position of strength. Intimidating
someone requires they believe there is a real threat.
Successfully intimidating someone imposes a trait upon
them, representing their fear of whatever the threat was.
Failing to intimidate someone makes further attempts to
intimidate them in that scene more difficult, often requir-
ing even greater threats to compensate.
Little by little, Picard reveals facts about his people,
trying to establish the idea that they are mortal, and
just more technologically advanced, without giv-
ing too much information and making the situation
worse. This is evidence. Using Reason + Command,
Picard rolls a Persuade task but only rolls 3 success-
es. Even with the first piece of evidence, he does not
roll 5 successes, so he fails to convince Nuria.
The drawback of Intimidation is it is inherently hos-
tile, which can cause problems of its own. Employing
Intimidation creates an antagonistic tension between
the two sides—represented by traits—which can worsen
other forms of interactions, cause lingering resentment,
or even provoke a target to aggression.
The gamemaster declares Picard will need something
bigger to reduce the Difficulty further. Picard shows
Nuria sickbay, and the death of one of his own people,
to prove he doesn’t have control over life and death.
This new evidence, and Picard’s final Persuade task,
which rolls 3 successes, are enough to convince her.
Now they must convince the rest of her people…
EXAMPLE: Gul Madred has Jean-Luc Picard captive,
and wants to learn the Federation’s plans. Picard has
no intention of giving up these plans, so Madred’s
initial Persuade task is impossible—simply asking for
the plans won’t work. Instead, Madred sets about us-
ing a range of interrogation techniques to try to break
Picard’s spirit—a form of Intimidation, to try to make
his Persuade task possible. Intimidating Picard is dif-
ficult—Picard is resolute, loyal to the Federation, and
282
CHAPTER 8
strong-minded. Madred gathers up his dice pool and
rolls Control + Security, with his Interrogation focus—
he’s in a good position to make threats and has all the
advantages. Madred rolls 4 successes. Picard gathers
up his dice, and uses one of his values to spend
Determination, rolling Control + Command, with his
Composure focus to stand firm; because complying
with Madred would force Picard to break his oaths,
the Difficulty is 4, as established by Madred’s initial
roll. Picard scores 4 successes thanks to utilizing his
value. He manages to fend off the first attempt, but
Madred will keep trying until he gets what he wants.
The gamemaster decides Madred will get one attempt
per day to break Picard down.
NEGOTIATION
Negotiation is a fine art, requiring a keen mind and
strong willpower. Negotiation involves compensation in
exchange for granting a request, and this compensation
can take many forms, with different people and differ-
ent circumstances susceptible to different offers. The
Ferengi and many other cultures trade in gold-pressed
latinum and other precious goods, continually adjusting
their offers until they reach the best deal for themselves.
Diplomats mediate disputes, arranging the terms of
trade agreements and territorial disputes by securing
concessions from each side until everyone is happy (or
at least willing to comply).
 Social Conflict
in Combat
Social conflict and combat are not mutually exclusive
modes of conflict. As long as characters can commu-
nicate, they can engage in social conflict. While social
conflict in combat—such as convincing the other side to
surrender—is unlikely to have much subtlety or nuance,
it can be helpful to convince opponents to put down
their blades and begin talking again.
In these instances, it’s worth remembering that commu-
nication doesn’t have to mean speech, text, or any other
form of complex communication. Actions can convey
ideas as effectively as words, so long as the ideas aren’t
particularly complex. A disruptor fired as a warning shot
can be a threat, while conveying a false appearance—
hidden troops, sensor decoys, or a feigned retreat—can
be an effective deception. Using these non-verbal cues,
as well as more precise forms of communication, can be
an effective way of ending a fight with less violence.
When you negotiate with someone you create a trait that
represents what you’re willing to offer, and a compli-
cation that represents the cost of that offer. Each new
offer is considered a new change of circumstances for
the Persuade task. Negotiation doesn’t require a task by
itself—it is more a process of trial and error.
Negotiations may involve a lot of position shifting from
both sides, as they make and retract offers, or discover
the other party doesn’t have what they want. In some
situations, numerous sessions of negotiation may be
needed to obtain what one party wants from someone
else to progress.
The drawback to Negotiation is the cost of success. You
may find yourself offering more than you wanted to give
up, or you may find that what you obtained was worth
less than the price you paid for it. Failing to provide what
was offered can also produce serious problems, which
can be significant if the negotiations were based on a lie.
In some ways, Negotiation is the antithesis of
Intimidation—achieving a goal through offering some-
thing productive, rather than threatening something
destructive. Few beings will be amenable to trade and
negotiate with those they’ve been threatened by, and
such trades may have a steeper cost because of previ-
ous hostilities.
EXAMPLE: Confronted by thousands of light-years
of Borg space, and lacking any other route through
or around it, Captain Janeway chooses to capitalize
on the Borg conflict with Species 8472. While the
Borg regard diplomacy and negotiation as irrelevant,
the unique situation gives the crew of Voyager an
opportunity: they can innovate and devise a means
of defeating Species 8472 where the Borg cannot.
Ensuring the data on this innovation is safe from
assimilation, Janeway proposes a trade to the Borg:
in exchange for safe passage across Borg space,
she will provide the Borg with the technology to
win their conflict—this creates an advantage of
“Something the Borg Need” towards this interaction,
and a complication of “Working with The Collective”
going forwards that represents the consequences of
this deal. Where previously the Persuade task would
have been impossible, now there is a possibility. The
gamemaster determines the Difficulty of the task is
now 5, allowing Janeway to attempt the Persuade
task. If this fails, Janeway can alter or adjust the deal
she’s offering to make a new attempt, possibly at a
lower Difficulty.
CONFLICT
283
: . CHAPTER 8.3
PERSONAL CONFLICT
“Looks like we’ll have
to repel them the old-fashioned way.
Setting my fists to stun and my kicks to kill!
- Commander Jack Ransom
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
COMMANDER
XANTHUS
TH'RAVIQ
Sometimes, despite
our best efforts,
words aren’t sufficient
to avoid or defuse
moments of violence.
Some beings thrive on
personal combat, while
others resort to using
their weapons rather
than their voices.
Whatever the case,
you must be prepared
to defend yourself and
your crewmates should
a scrap break out.
THIS SECTION DEALS WITH SITUA-
tions where violence—hopefully a last
resort, or a tool of self-defense—has
broken out. Combat does not prevent
other methods being used, and any
worthwhile battle will have an objec-
tive above and beyond simply over-
coming the enemy. These goals are
normally straightforward: reaching a
location, object, or person, or pre-
venting the enemy from doing those
things. There may also be a time factor
involved in a combat encounter, where
achieving the goal in a specific time
frame is necessary, or one side needs
to fend off the enemy long enough to
complete some other challenge.
One important consideration for combat
is that not all combats are fought to the
bitter end—few combatants are willing
to die pointlessly, and even implacable
foes like the Borg or the Jem’Hadar
know the value of regrouping rather
than pushing on against hopeless odds.
Instead, combat frequently ends in one
side retreating from the battle. This may
involve a fighting withdrawal on foot, the
arrival of a transport, or getting trans-
ported out.
THE BATTLEFIELD
IN BATTLE, KNOWING THE LOCATION
of every combatant is important, and
determining both absolute position
(where you are on the battlefield) and
relative position (how far you are from a
given friend or foe) is essential. Rather
than track everything in precise distanc-
es, Star Trek Adventures resolves this
matter using distances and zones.
environments may have many more. For
example, combat inside a starship may
treat individual rooms as distinct zones,
using the internal walls and bulkheads
as natural divisions, while a city street
may focus zones on features like parked
vehicles, the fronts of buildings, alley-
ways, and so forth.
: . Environments
and Zones
The battlefield in which you fight is
always a discrete location—a building,
a colony street, an area of wilderness,
part of a starship, or another area. A
battlefield is divided into several zones
based on the terrain in the area. A
simple battlefield may consist of three
to five significant zones, while complex
Track your characters’ place in combat
by noting which zone they are in. This
should be easy in most cases, as zones
are defined by the terrain around them,
tracking your character can be a matter
of simple description: a character may
be described as ‘behind the control
console’ or ‘standing by the shuttle’.
This has the advantage of relying on
natural language and intuitive con-
cepts, rather than specific game terms,
and avoids the tracking of relative
284
CHAPTER 8
 Using Maps
and Miniatures
Larger or particularly complex scenes may become
tricky to track purely by memory so you may wish to
sketch a map or use map tiles. You can mark your
positions using tokens or miniatures and move them as
required. These are not essential for play.
JUSTIN USHER
distances which can become fiddly where there are
many characters present.
Zones do not have a fixed size; they are based on the
features of the battlefield. A forest may be divided into
many small zones between trees, while its clearings will
have larger zones. Larger zones convey quicker move-
ment and easier target acquisition in open areas, while
the smaller zones convey cramped conditions and short
lines of sight.
Individual zones often have terrain effects defined when
the gamemaster creates them, like cover or difficult
terrain, interactive objects, or hazards. Some zones may
be defined more by the absence of terrain than its pres-
ence, and some environments are enhanced by a few
‘empty’ zones between obstacles.
CONFLICT
285
DISTANCES AND RANGE
MOVEMENT AND RANGED ATTACKS RANGE IS MEAS-
ured in four distances and one state, based on the
battlefield’s zones.
§ Long range is defined as two zones away, or a dis-
tance of 2 zones.
§ Extreme range is any zone beyond long range, or a
distance of 3 or more zones.
§ Reach is the state when an object or character is
within or moves into easy reach of your character. You
enter Reach to interact with objects manually or to
make a melee attack. When you move your character
into or within a zone, you can declare they are moving
into or out of Reach of something. Being within Reach
of an enemy increases the Difficulty of any task that
isn’t a melee attack by 1.
§ Close range is defined as the zone you are in, or a
distance of 0 zones.
§ Medium range is defined as an adjacent zone, or a
distance of 1 zone.
: . Movement and Terrain
Moving to anywhere within Medium range requires a
minor action. Moving further than this requires a major
action. Movement can take many forms—walking, run-
ning, jumping, swimming, climbing, etc.
Difficult terrain describes any ground requiring more
effort to cross, either because it hinders you or because
you need to be careful where you step. A zone may be
filled with difficult terrain, slowing anyone attempting to
cross it.
 Communication and Perception
DISTANCES AND COMMUNICATION
You will want to communicate during combat—bat-
tle cries, verbal challenges, and other dialogue.
Your characters can converse normally within Close
range—they’re near enough to one another to be
heard and to make themselves understood without
raising their voices.
A character at Medium range can be communicated
with, but they’ll need to raise their voice and shout to be
understood. At Long and Extreme range, you can shout
to communicate, but conveying any but the simplest of
meanings is unlikely. Communicators and similar tech-
nologies make distance trivial, allowing you to communi-
cate across vast distances with ease.
trait. Species traits often apply here, as some species
can perceive things more clearly in darkness, or see over
longer distances.
OTHER SENSES
Humanoid perception is generally dominated by
sight and hearing, but other senses can come into
play depending on the species. A character’s sense
of touch is limited to Reach. Humans and most other
civilized species can only detect the most pungent
smells outside of Reach. Creatures with a keen sense
of smell—such as Klingons and Vulcans—can detect
scents within Close range, and tasks made to detect
something by smell beyond Close range increase in
Difficulty by 1 per zone.
DISTANCE AND PERCEPTION
The further away something is, the harder it is to notice.
In game terms, this means characters in distant zones
are harder to observe or identify. The Difficulty of tasks
to try to notice creatures or objects increase by 1 at
Medium range, by 2 at Long range, and by 3 at Extreme
range. Your gamemaster describes what you can see
clearly, and people who aren’t trying to hide from sight
can be seen moving at most ranges. Traits, such as
darkness or smoke, increase the Difficulty to perceive
others or make it entirely impossible depending on the
A species with a particularly keen sense may reduce
the Difficulty of all tasks related to that sense, while dull
senses increase the Difficulty of those tasks—in any
case, this is covered by the creature’s species trait.
Telepathy can be thought of as a sense in this regard, able
to discern thoughts and the mental presence of other
creatures over a distance. Similarly, the use of scanning
equipment such as a tricorder can allow you to detect
things that would be otherwise unable to be perceived.
286
CHAPTER 8
: . Terrain Momentum Costs
DIFFICULT TERRAIN MOMENTUM COST
Thick mud, loose sand, stairs 1
Swamp, unstable rubble 2
Steep slope, fast-flowing water 3
: . Obstacle Momentum Costs
OBSTACLE MOMENTUM COST
Wall or barrier up to waist height,
or a short jump
1
Wall or barrier up to chest height,
or a long jump
2
Wall or barrier taller than you,
or a long jump with a run-up 3
Obstacles are similar in that they hinder your move-
ment, but they exist between zones—attempts to move
from one zone to another where an obstacle is present
may slow your progress. Obstacles may be barriers you
need to climb up or over, or they might be gaps that you
need to jump past.
When you attempt to move from an area of difficult
terrain, or cross an obstacle, you must spend 1 or more
Momentum, depending on how difficult the terrain or
obstacle is. This is Immediate.
If you do not have sufficient Momentum available (and
don’t want to add Threat), you must find some way to
generate the points you need. The simplest way to do
this is to attempt the Sprint task as a major action, gen-
erating Momentum with a Difficulty 0 Fitness + Security
task—any successes become Momentum, which can
be spent on moving through the terrain. Other tasks can
also generate Momentum in this way, but taking the
Sprint major action combines movement and a task into
a single action for the sake of convenience.
Characters with appropriate traits (representing gear
for traversing terrain, or perhaps physical adaptations
suitable to a particular type of movement) may reduce
the cost of crossing types of terrain by 1, at the gam-
emaster’s discretion. For example, Denobulans evolved
to climb quickly and efficiently, and thus reduce the cost
of difficult terrain when climbing.
 Falling
Sheer drops, steep slopes, precarious catwalks, deep
chasms, and other places where falling is a possibility
are the most common forms of hazardous terrain. As fall-
ing is such a common risk, it deserves specific attention,
which can also serve as inspiration for how to handle
other hazards.
The simplest way to consider falling is to inflict dam-
age—falling a long way may cause an injury. However,
this is probably the least interesting way to approach the
situation, and if the group isn’t in combat, it can be an
inconsequential one. Further, there are a range of other
possibilities that could be explored:
§ The fall was inconvenient, and the climb back up will
slow the group down as they wait for whomever fell.
§ The fall was inconvenient, and the character that
fell is stuck unless someone figures out a way to get
them back up. That might be a task or challenge.
§ The fall was inconvenient, and the character that fell
is separated from the group and must make their own
way to their destination.
§ The fall was painful, and the character that fell suffered a
complication, like a twisted ankle, or some other incon-
venience. This might be avoided by suffering Stress.
§ The fall was dangerous, and the character that fell
suffers an Injury (which cannot be avoided), needing
medical attention to stabilize and help to continue.
You could offer Success at Cost on tasks to avoid falling;
the character may only fall part of the way, but grab onto
something, or lose an item in the process. This is useful
for falls that would otherwise be deadly.
: . Cover
Cover is a common terrain effect, representing objects
that interfere with your ability to see or attack a target
clearly. Cover allows you to turn an enemy ranged attack
into an opposed task, giving you a better chance of re-
sisting them and possibly counter-attacking. Cover can
be represented by a location trait.
A zone will either provide cover to any creature in the
zone, or the gamemaster may point out features within
the zone that grant Cover (requiring you to be within
Reach of that feature to benefit from it).
CONFLICT
287
: . Interactive Objects
Interactive objects are any object or terrain feature you
can manipulate. Doors and windows are examples, as are
control panels and computer terminals. Interacting with
these objects may only take a minor action, but a complex
object might need a major action, including a task, to in-
teract with properly, at the discretion of the gamemaster.
COMBAT ACTIONS
IN ANY GIVEN TURN IN A COMBAT, YOU CAN AT-
tempt one major action and one minor action. You may
gain additional actions by spending Momentum or
adding to Threat.
 Being Prone
: . Minor Actions
Minor actions are short activities that do not include a
task. They are taken in support of a major action, like
moving into position before making an attack. You can
take 1 minor action on each of your turns, and may
take an additional minor action per turn by spending 1
Momentum.
While you have the Prone trait, the Difficulty of all
Ranged Attacks against you from Medium range or fur-
ther away increase by 1, and if you are in Cover, you gain
an additional +1 Protection. However, Melee Attacks
and Ranged Attacks at Close range gain 2 bonus
Momentum against you, and you cannot attempt any
movement-related major actions. Bonus Momentum
cannot be saved.
: . Personal Conflict Minor Actions
ACTION EFFECT
Aim Draw Item Interact
Movement
Prepare
Stand/
Drop Prone
When you make an Attack this turn, you may re-roll a single d20 on the task roll.
You pick up an item within Reach or draw an item you are carrying. If using the item doesn’t
require a task to use, you can use it immediately as part of this minor action.
You Interact with an object in the environment, such as opening a door by pressing the control
panel or issuing a simple voice command to a computer. Complex interactions may require a
major action and a task roll instead.
You move up to one zone, to any point within Medium range. You cannot take this minor action
in the same turn as a Movement major action. If there are any enemies within Reach of you, you
cannot perform this action.
You prepare for or set up a task. Some items require this minor action before they can be used,
and some major actions require this minor action before they can be attempted. Sometimes items
will grant special benefits if this action is used before performing a task.
You drop to the ground, making yourself a smaller target, or stand up from being prone. You
cannot Stand and Drop Prone in the same turn.
288
CHAPTER 8
: . Major Actions
Major actions are the main activity you perform on your
turn, and normally include a task. You can attempt 1
major action during your turn. You can attempt a second
major action on your turn by spending 2 Momentum
(this adds 1 to the Difficulty of any task on the second
major action). You may also gain a second major action
during the round if you are the subject of the Direct
action. You may not attempt more than two major
actions during any round.
: . Attacks
An Attack is the most direct major action in combat. The
process for attempting an Attack is shown opposite:
EXAMPLE: Attempting to drive the Borg from the
lower decks of the Enterprise-E, Picard, Data, and
Worf along with several other officers find themselves
surrounded and under attack. Data buys an extra d20
with Momentum, and opens fire with his phaser II,
rolling his Control (10) and Security (3). He gen-
erates the necessary two successes, and the Borg
Drone is hit, suffering an Injury.
: . Personal Conflict Major Actions
ACTION EFFECT
Assist
Attack Create Trait
Direct
First Aid
Guard
Other Tasks Pass Ready
Sprint
You Assist a character with a task roll during their turn. (See Teamwork and Assistance, page
255). If they have not yet acted, take this action on your turn, and Assist when they take their turn.
If they attempt a task before your turn, you may choose to Assist them immediately, but you give up
your turn later in the round to do so.
You Attack an enemy or other viable target and attempt to injure them. See Attempting an Attack
(page 290) for details.
This is a task with a Difficulty of 2, using an attribute + department and focus based on what you
are doing. If successful, you create, change, or remove an existing trait, or increase or decrease the
Potency of an existing trait.
This may only be attempted by one character on each side in a position of authority (the highest-ranking
person, or a nominated leader). Spend 1 Momentum and select one ally who can hear you. They may
immediately attempt a single action with no +1 Difficulty; you Assist with Control + Command.
You attempt to revive a Defeated character within Reach. Attempt a Daring + Medicine task with a
Difficulty of 2. If successful, the character is no longer Defeated, though they may still have an Injury.
Alternately, you may tend to an Injury on another character within Reach. Attempt a Daring +
Medicine task with a Difficulty equal to the Injury’s severity. If successful, one Injury is treated (see
Recovery and Healing, page 292).
You defend yourself, preparing for an attack. This is an Insight + Security task with a Difficulty of 0.
Success increases the Difficulty of any attacks against you by 1 until the start of your next turn. You
can confer the benefits of this task to an ally within Reach instead of yourself—this increases the
Difficulty of this task by 1, and the benefit lasts until the start of your ally’s next turn.
Perform a task at the discretion of the gamemaster. Circumstances or objectives may dictate a task,
and dangerous situations may require overcoming an extended task or completing a challenge.
You choose not to attempt a task.
You choose another major action to take as a reaction to something else. When the trigger event
occurs, you temporarily interrupt the current character’s turn to resolve your readied major action,
then play proceeds as normal. If the triggering event does not occur before your next turn, the
action is lost. You can still perform minor actions during your turn as normal.
You run forward, trying to cross the area quickly. You move two zones, to any point within Long
range. If there is difficult or hazardous terrain, you may attempt a Fitness + Conn task with Difficulty
0 as part of this action, to generate Momentum to cross the terrain as part of this action.
CONFLICT
289
ATTEMPTING AN ATTACK
1
CHOOSE A WEAPON AND TARGET: Select the weapon you wish to
Attack with, and the target. You must also choose whether you intend
to inflict a Stun or Deadly Injury; if you choose to inflict a Deadly Injury,
add 1 Threat.
§ MELEE ATTACK: Can be attempted against any target within Reach.
§ RANGED ATTACK: Can be attempted against any target you can see.
ATTEMPT ATTACK: Make a task roll to see if the Attack is successful.
2
§ MELEE ATTACK: Attempt a Daring + Security task with a Difficulty of
1. If the target is aware of your attack and able to defend themselves,
this becomes an opposed task instead, resisted by the target’s own
Daring + Security.
§ RANGED ATTACK: Attempt a Control + Security task with a Difficulty
of 2. If the target has Cover from the attack (see Cover, page 287), then
this becomes an opposed task instead, resisted by the target's own
Control + Security.
RESOLVE ATTACK: If your Attack succeeded, you inflict an Injury upon your target
(see Injuries, below).
3
§ COUNTERATTACK: If the Attack was an opposed task, and the target won, then they
may either move out of Reach (if in melee) or spend 2 Momentum to Counterattack,
inflicting an Injury upon you in return.
§ AVOID INJURY: A character who suffers an Injury may Avoid Injury (page 292).
: . Injuries
When you successfully hit an opponent during combat,
they may become Injured. Some environmental effects
also come with a risk of Injury, such as falling from great
heights, being set on fire, exposure to hostile environ-
ments, industrial or engineering accidents, and a range
of other hazards.
When a character is hit by an attack, or is affected by a
hazard (an environmental danger, such as a fire, falling
rocks, or similar), they suffer an Injury.
The exact nature of the Injury is described as a character
trait (see page 250), one which represents the damage
done to the character. As with any trait, this may make
some actions more difficult, or even impossible, de-
pending on what the Injury represents. When a charac-
ter suffers an Injury, the nature of the attack or hazard
which caused it will suggest a name for that Injury—for
example, a disruptor may cause a Burn trait—but players
or the gamemaster may suggest a fitting alternative. The
gamemaster’s ruling on this is final, however.
All sources of Injury also have a severity. This is a
number, normally between 1 and 5, which indicates how
290
CHAPTER 8
RODRIGO GONZALEZ
TOLEDO
 Assistance in Combat
The Assist action works a little differently to most other
major actions in combat. You can choose to Assist when
another character declares the task you wish to help
with, even though it isn’t your turn. However, you can
only provide this assistance if you have not already acted
this round, and assisting means that you will not take a
turn of your own later in the round—assisting takes up
your turn instead.
While this may seem complex on the surface, in play
it makes teamwork and assistance easier to resolve:
you don’t have to plan in advance if you want to Assist
someone, you simply declare it at the moment it be-
comes relevant, so long as you’re not doing anything
else that round.
 NPCs and Injury
The rules for Injury here apply primarily to main player
characters. NPCs and supporting characters are treat-
ed differently.
A Minor NPC, or any supporting character who does not
possess any values, does not suffer injuries. They are
instantly Defeated by any successful attack and cannot
choose to Avoid Injury. The only difference between
Stun and Deadly attacks against a Minor NPC or basic
supporting character is that Stun attacks leave them
unconscious and Deadly attacks kill them instantly (or
disintegrate them, at gamemaster’s discretion).
A Notable NPC, or any supporting character with one or
more values, suffers injuries as normal. Supporting char-
acters may Avoid Injury as player characters do (but have
only half the amount of initial Stress), while a Notable
NPC may spend Threat equal to severity to Avoid Injury,
but they can only do so once per scene.
A Major NPC receives Injuries as normal and may Avoid
Injury by spending Threat equal to severity.
CONFLICT
291
severe the Injury is. The severity of an Injury is impor-
tant in a few different ways, explained below. When you
succeed at an Attack, you may spend 2 Momentum to
increase the severity by 1. This is repeatable, but you
cannot increase the severity by more than 2.
When a character suffers an Injury, they are also
Defeated. A defeated character immediately falls prone
and cannot take any actions for the rest of the scene.
Characters can recover from being defeated in a few
ways, described in the following sections.
SET PHASERS TO STUN
Injuries broadly come in two categories: Stun and
Deadly, and which one an Attack or hazard inflicts will be
listed in its description: for example, an Unarmed Attack
inflicts Stun Injuries.
Some Attacks have multiple options for the kinds of
Injuries they can inflict. For example, a Phaser can inflict
Stun or Deadly Injuries. Where this choice exists, you
must choose which kind of Injury you wish to inflict
when you choose the target of the attack. If you’re
counterattacking, make this choice when you spend
Momentum to counterattack.
§ Stun Attacks are intended to incapacitate a target
without causing lasting harm. An Injury caused by a
Stun Attack only lasts while you are Defeated. If you
stop being Defeated, a Stun Injury is removed at the
end of your next turn, as you shake off the effects.
§ Deadly Attacks are those which inflict serious harm
upon the target, which might result in death. If you
choose to make a Deadly Attack, add 1 Threat.
While you have one or more Deadly Injuries and are
Defeated, you are Dying, and you will die at the end of
the scene if you do not receive medical attention.
STRESS AND AVOIDING INJURY
When you suffer an Injury, you may Avoid Injury by taking
Stress. Suffer Stress equal to the attack’s severity to
ignore that Injury, suggesting that you ducked out of the
way at the last moment or otherwise resisted the attack.
This also prevents you from being defeated by that Injury
as well.
RECOVERY AND HEALING
You may provide First Aid to help defeated and injured
allies. The First Aid action allows you to attempt a
Daring + Medicine task with a Difficulty of 2 to tend
292
CHAPTER 8
 Protection
A character wearing armor, or using some other protec-
tive device, has Protection; for example, combat armor
provides Protection 1. When you suffer an Injury, the se-
verity is reduced by an amount equal to your Protection,
to a minimum of 1.
 Injury Complications
In some circumstances, it may be fitting for a character
to suffer minor traits that represent minor Injuries: cuts,
scrapes, bruises, sprains, fractures, and burns that
are not serious, but which are still painful or inconven-
ient. If you’re attempting to heal a character, complica-
tions you suffer may be applied to your patient, repre-
senting new problems encountered (or even caused)
during treatment.
Suffering these minor Injuries does not cause Defeat,
and they are not counted towards the total number of
Injuries a character may suffer. However, these compli-
cations can result in higher Difficulty for other tasks.
These “minor Injury” complications can still be treated
and healed in the same way as other complications, as if
they had a severity of 1. Complications may also exacer-
bate other Injuries, adding 1 to the severity of an existing
Injury (or minor Injury).
to another character within Reach. If you complete the
task, the patient is no longer Defeated. Alternatively, you
may attempt a Daring + Medicine task with a Difficulty
equal to the Injury’s severity to treat an Injury the patient
has suffered.
A treated Injury no longer imposes any penalty, but it is
still an Injury, and it will need proper medical treatment
to remove entirely. Further, complications may result in
a treated injury “re-opening” during strenuous activity,
requiring the injury to be treated again.
Longer-term healing cannot be done during combat. An
Injured character requires medical treatment to remove
the Injury completely. This treatment is normally a
Control + Medicine task with a Difficulty of X and takes
X hours, where X is the severity in both cases. Add 1 to
the Difficulty and the complication range if the Injury was
not treated. This Difficulty may be modified further by cir-
cumstances—attempting to heal a severe disruptor burn
in a damp cave with a basic medkit is much harder than
attempting the same thing in a well-stocked sickbay.
If the patient has multiple Injuries, treating them all at
once could be treated as a challenge, or even as an
extended task (with a progress track of 3x the number of
Injuries), at the gamemaster’s discretion.
PERSONAL CONFLICT MOMENTUM SPENDS
MOMENTUM IS A KEY TACTICAL RESOURCE DURING
combat. When you generate Momentum in combat, you
have numerous options available to achieve victory over
your enemies, empower your comrades, and bolster
your own prowess.
Repeatable means they can be repeated as many times
as you have Momentum to pay for them, and spends
listed as Immediate can be used at any time during
your turn (and can be paid for by generating Threat). If a
Momentum spend is neither Immediate nor Repeatable,
you can only use them once per turn.
You have all the normal Momentum options (page 260)
available to you in a combat scene, with additional
options related directly to combat. Spends listed as
: . Personal Conflict Momentum Spends
COMBAT MOMENTUM SPEND DESCRIPTION
Added Severity
(2 Momentum, Repeatable)
Alter Trait
(2 Momentum)
Extra Minor Action
(1 Momentum) Keep The Initiative
(2 Momentum, Immediate)
Obtain Information
(1 Momentum, Repeatable)
Extra Major Action
(2 Momentum)
Disarm
(1–2 Momentum)
Buy D20s
(1–3 Momentum, Immediate,
Repeatable)
Increase the severity of a successful attack by 1 for every 2 Momentum spent.
You cannot increase the severity by more than 2.
You create, change, or remove a trait in the scene. This change must relate to
the task completed.
You take one additional minor action on your turn.
At the end of your turn, pass the next turn to an ally instead of an enemy. Once
that ally has acted, the next turn must go to an enemy.
You ask the gamemaster a single question about the scene, which the
gamemaster must answer truthfully.
You may attempt one additional major action. If this action includes a task, the
task’s Difficulty is increased by 1.
Target drops one weapon they are holding to within their Reach. This costs 1
Momentum if the weapon is held in one hand. If the weapon is two-handed,
the cost increases to 2 Momentum.
Before you attempt a task (but after the gamemaster sets its Difficulty), build
your dice pool, starting with 2d20. Add bonus d20s granted from talents and
other game effects. Add more d20s by spending Momentum or adding Threat.
The first bonus die costs 1, the second costs 2 more, and the third costs 3
more. You can't roll more than 5d20 on any task attempt.
CONFLICT
293
: . CHAPTER 8.4
STARSHIP CONFLICT
“There’s an old saying: fortune favors the bold.
Well, I guess we’re about to find out.
- Captain Benjamin Sisko
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
COMMANDER
XANTHUS
TH'RAVIQ
Starfleet vessels such
as the Challenger carry
a devastating inventory
of weaponry. Bringing
that arsenal to bear
against an adversary
may often be in self-
defense, and may often
happen because best
efforts at diplomacy
have broken down.
Whatever the case,
starship battles are
intense, lethal, and,
more than anything
else, costly. The rules
in this chapter will aid
you in engaging in,
and surviving, starship
combat.
LARGE, POWERFUL VESSELS WITH
strong shields can weather hostile
situations, while nimble starships can
maneuver and make themselves difficult
to attack. Once a vessel’s shields are
worn down, grievous damage can be
inflicted upon hull and systems, and
may result in the deaths of dozens or
hundreds of personnel.
Just as with personal combat, the
core of starship combat is the Attack.
Successful Attacks against starships
are seldom so final as Attacks against
individual characters.
Starship combat uses the same action
order as other conflicts. However, the
action order applies to characters
rather than ships: each character re-
ceives a turn in the action order, during
which they take actions to operate
their ship.
: . Environment
and Zones
As with personal combat, starship
combat takes place across an environ-
ment broken up into numerous zones,
allowing gamemasters and players alike
to visualize where ships, planets, gas
clouds, and asteroid fields are relative to
one another.
An environment for starship combat
covers a large area—potentially an area
many thousands of kilometers across,
and even this is only a tiny fraction of the
area within a star system. This area may
be the edge of a nebula, an asteroid belt,
the orbit of one or more small planets,
or any other region of space, though it
is worth remembering that because bat-
tles are always fought for a reason, they
are often fought somewhere interesting,
rather than in the empty void.
The environment is then divided into
zones based on physical objects, spatial
phenomena, and other details within the
area. Starship combat zones can easily
be defined in three dimensions if de-
sired (though this isn’t necessary if you
want to keep things simple), with zones
“above” and “below” one another, and
with empty zones to provide sizeable
gaps between objects and phenomena.
A simple battlefield may consist of three
to five significant zones, while complex
environments may have many more.
More zones are typically more interest-
ing than fewer, as they provide a greater
variety of movement options and tactical
opportunities, but this can take more
planning and may slow down game play.
As with personal combat, zones have
no fixed size or shape, and these can
be varied to accommodate the gam-
emaster’s preferences and needs, and
to represent other factors. Zones within
a nebula may be smaller, representing
more difficult movement and sensor in-
terference, while open space may have
larger zones. By and large, the same
advice that applies to personal scale
zones apply to starship combat as well,
and gamemasters who desire concrete
values rather than abstract ranges are
encouraged to set specific sizes and
shapes for individual zones, using them
as a grid.
294
CHAPTER 8
Individual zones may have terrain effects when the
gamemaster creates them. They may provide conceal-
ment or interference, hinder movement, present hazards
to overcome, or otherwise alter the way vessels interact
with the area.
Communication during starship combat is a simple
matter; subspace communications work at speeds that
far exceed the maximum velocity of a starship, mean-
ing that communicating with anyone else in the same
combat is instantaneous, so long as their communica-
tions systems are working. Of course, circumstances
can affect this—the gas, dust, and radiation of a nebula
may interfere with subspace signals, limiting communi-
cations range, for example—but such differences are left
to the gamemaster to determine.
: . Vessels and Zones
To help players visualize their vessel’s place in an en-
counter, and to manage combat effectively, it’s useful to
keep track of which zone each vessel is in at any given
moment. As zones are defined by the bodies and phe-
nomena around them, tracking a vessel can be a matter
of simple description—an enemy might be ‘behind the
moon’ or ‘on the edge of the gas cloud’. This has the
advantage of relying on natural language and intuitive
concepts, rather than specific game terms, and avoids
the tracking of specific distances which can become
fiddly where there are many vessels present.
GOING TO WARP
Starships can travel extremely quickly, which means they
can leave a battle at a moment's notice.
For a ship to go to warp, Reserve Power must be rerout-
ed to engines, and you must take the Prepare minor
action if in combat. Once completed, the character at
the helm must attempt a Control + Conn task with a
Difficulty of 1, assisted by the ship’s Engines + Conn; in
combat, this is a major action. If this task is successful,
the ship may move in one of two ways:
Larger or particularly complex scenes may become
tricky to track purely by memory, so the gamemaster
may wish to use something to help remind everyone of
which vessel is where. If you’re already using a sketched
map, then marking vessel positions in pencil (so they
can be easily erased and redrawn) is a simple approach,
as is using tokens or miniatures.
: . Distances
Movement and ranged attacks need some sense of
distance to make them meaningful. In combat, the
relative placement of zones determines this distance. To
keep things simple and fluid, range is measured in four
categories and one state.
§ The ship moves a number of zones up to the ship’s
Engines score.
§ The ship immediately leaves the battlefield, which
will normally end the scene, though the enemy may
choose to pursue.
If the enemies wish to pursue, each pursuing ship must
also go to warp, and must score more successes than
the fleeing ship scored; if they do, then they will quickly
catch up with the fleeing ship. Once their pursuers have
: . Distances
DISTANCE DESCRIPTION
Contact
Close Medium Long Extreme This state is used mainly for ships docking with one another, or with starbases and other facilities,
shuttlecraft on approach to land, and similar situations. Contact isn’t a specific range, but rather is
a state a vessel can enter when it moves—that is, when a vessel moves into or within a zone, the
pilot may declare the vessel is moving into or out of Contact.
Moving into Contact too quickly can be dangerous, as high-speed collisions can cause
considerable damage (see page 309).
The zone the vessel is within at the time. Moving within Close range is a trivial affair, often
handled purely with maneuvering thrusters and inertia. Close range is a distance of 0 zones.
Any zone adjacent to the vessel’s current zone. Medium range is a distance of 1 zone.
Long range is a distance of 2 zones.
Extreme range is a distance of 3 or more zones.
CONFLICT
295
 NPCs and Starship Operations
The rules for starship combat are designed from the
perspective of player characters operating a single ship,
which will be the normal situation for most groups of play-
er characters. However, this can be impractical for NPC
ships, where the gamemaster may be running several
ships and doesn’t necessarily want to track a half-dozen
NPC bridge officers per bridge.
However, there is a limit to this; in any round, each NPC
ship may only attempt one task assisted by each sys-
tem—one task assisted by Weapons, one task assisted
by Engines, etc.—though the gamemaster may spend
1 Threat when the ship takes a turn to ignore this limit
during their current action. That is, if a ship wants to take
three tasks using Weapons during a round, the second
and third Weapons tasks each cost 1 Threat.
An NPC ship does not have specific crew at individual
positions on the bridge. Instead, each NPC vessel has a
Crew Quality, which provides attribute and department
ratings needed by the vessel for any given task. NPC
crew used in this way are always considered to have an
applicable focus.
NPC ships do not have Reserve Power (see page 185).
Because individual NPC crew members are not tracked,
each NPC ship takes several turns during each round—
one turn for each point of the ship’s Scale—representing
the individual actions of that ship’s crew.
: . NPC Vessel Crew Qualities
CREW QUALITY ATTRIBUTE DEPARTMENT
Basic 8 1
Proficient 9 2
Talented 10 3
Exceptional 11 4
caught them, the crew of the fleeing ship must choose
how they will respond.
effectively detected, with the greatest clarity and detail
available at ranges of a few thousand kilometers (i.e.,
within Close range).
This task may Succeed at Cost; if the task fails, the ship
either does not move, or it moves as above but suffers
an additional complication.
There are no hard-and-fast rules for this; a starship and
its crew will use whatever sensors are most effective at a
particular range, though the gamemaster should adjust
the amount of detail provided at different ranges.
EXAMPLE: The crew of the Titan-A is on the run from
a conspiracy that has turned Starfleet against them,
and have stopped at Daystrom station to allow Raffi,
Riker, and Worf to pursue a lead. However, the Titan-A
soon needs to flee, as two Echelon-class starships
arrive searching for the fugitives. Reserve Power is
rerouted to the ship’s engines, and Ensign LaForge
takes the Prepare minor action and attempts the
task roll to go to warp, scoring 4 successes. The two
Starfleet vessels may attempt to pursue, but each
will need to score at least 4 successes of their own
to catch up with the Titan-A: if they cannot, then the
Titan-A will escape.
: . Movement and Terrain
Moving around in starship combat is controlled at the
ship’s helm, and takes different actions depending on
the nature of the movement. Movement can take a few
different forms, from fine maneuvering using thrusters,
to sublight flight using impulse engines, to faster-than-
light flight using warp drive.
DISTANCES AND SENSORS
In ideal circumstances, a starship can scan and detect
objects, vessels, and phenomena over a certain size
or magnitude for several light-years in every direction.
Long-range sensors are potent in this regard. The closer
an object is, the smaller objects and details can be
This movement may sometimes be hindered by spatial
phenomena and effects that are collectively referred to
as “terrain.”
Difficult terrain describes any space that requires
more effort to cross, either because it hinders the ship’s
engines or because it requires slower and more careful
maneuvering. A zone may be filled with difficult terrain,
slowing anyone attempting to cross it.
296
CHAPTER 8
TOBIAS RICHTER
When you attempt to move from an area of difficult ter-
rain, or cross an obstacle, you must spend one or more
Momentum to do so, depending on how difficult the
terrain or obstacle is. This is Immediate. If you do not pay
the cost, you cannot leave the zone.
If you do not have sufficient Momentum available (and
don’t want to add Threat), then you must find some way
to generate the points you need. The simplest way to do
this is to attempt the Maneuver major action, generating
Momentum with a Difficulty 0 Control + Conn task—any
successes become Momentum, which can be spent on
moving through the terrain. Other tasks can also gen-
erate Momentum in this way, but taking the Maneuver
major action is intended for this.
Hazardous terrain describes difficult terrain which is
also potentially damaging or dangerous to cross. It may
be crossed by spending Momentum or adding Threat
as normal, but if you choose to add Threat, that Threat
is spent immediately to inflict damage on the ship or im-
pose a trait. The damage inflicted is determined by the
nature of the hazard. This is described more in Chapter
9: Gamemastering.
: . Starship Terrains
DIFFICULT TERRAIN MOMENTUM COST
Planetary Gravity Well,
Dust Cloud, Debris Field 1
Stellar Gravity Well,
Dense Nebula, Comet Tail 2
Singularity Gravity Well,
Strange Space Anomaly 3
CONFLICT
297
PREPARE FOR BATTLE
AS WITH PERSONAL COMBAT, IN ANY GIVEN TURN A
character can attempt a single major action and a single
minor action. Unlike with personal combat, the kinds of
actions a character is likely to perform will vary based on
their position on the bridge (or elsewhere on the ship),
and different officers will control different systems as
befits their positions.
This section lists the common roles found aboard a
starship and the minor and major actions they can
perform in combat. Some roles may not be present in
certain eras of play (e.g., navigators and helmsmen are
replaced by flight controllers / conn officers by the early
24th century).
: . Minor Actions
As described on page 288, minor actions are activ-
ities a character can undertake that don’t count as a
task, and which don’t require dice to be rolled. You can
take 1 minor action on each of your turns, and may
take an additional minor action per turn by spending 1
Momentum (Immediate).
The most common starship minor actions are listed in
the following sections, divided by position. These are
specific to starship operations during combat; a charac-
ter can perform personal combat minor actions (page
288) if necessary, such as when being boarded.
 Battling Very
Large Adversaries
Some civilizations, such as the Borg, possess space-
craft and space stations far bigger than even the largest
Federation starship. Vessels and stations with Scales
7+ pose a challenge for gamemasters who want to keep
their starship combat from turning into a lengthy affair.
: . Major Actions
A character can attempt a single major action (typically
to attempt a task) during each turn, though there are
two ways a character could attempt a second major
action in a turn:
Gamemasters have a few options:
§ LEADERSHIP: The Direct major action allows a
character to issue an order to a subordinate, granting
them an extra major action.
§ MOMENTUM: A character may spend 2 Momentum
after a successful task to attempt a second major
action; however, any task attempted as part of this
second major action increases in Difficulty by 1.
Regardless of the method used, a character cannot
attempt more than two major actions in a round. The
§ Take all the turns allocated to the NPCs. For exam-
ple, if you are challenging your group with an adver-
sary vessel or station at Scale 10, you may choose
to take all 10 turns in a round. This may prove to be
a significant challenge to your players, and may take
more time to resolve each action.
§ Take turns equal to the players’ total turns. Have
your NPC vessel take only as many turns as the
players took in the round. Perhaps consider adding an
advantage or altering the complication range for NPC
tasks in this round to account for their superior size.
Surplus NPC actions can instead be traded for extra
dice on the NPC ship’s actions on a 1-for-1 basis: in
essence, any NPC ship’s turns beyond the number
of turns the player characters take are used to assist,
rather than taking any other action.
§ Take as many turns as you see fit, up to the NPCs’
maximum number for the round, then narrate to
taste. You may choose to take only as many turns you
need in order to set up some key moment during the
battle that you want to handle as narrative.
 Talking is
a Free Action
Characters in the same physical space within the ship
during starship combat can communicate freely: it
doesn’t take an action to talk unless the talking is part of
another task. Most talking a character does should take
place on their turn, but characters are free to comment
on or interject during another character’s turn.
Characters in different parts of the ship—say, the
captain on the bridge and the chief engineer in main
engineering—can communicate freely under normal cir-
cumstances, but damage to the ship’s communications
system may result in parts of the ship being cut off from
communicating with one another.
298
CHAPTER 8
DAT PHAN
major actions detailed on the following pages apply to
operating a starship in combat. Personal conflict tasks
can also be attempted where relevant, such as when
repelling boarders.
: . Positions and Starship
Combat Actions
During starship combat, each character is likely to be
operating a specific station on the bridge, or per-
forming actions elsewhere on the ship. The actions a
character can perform from the bridge are determined
by their position.
The key bridge positions are as follows, though these
activities are typically grouped together into a small-
er number of stations, as determined by the bridge's
configuration (page 194)—for example, a single station
may combine both the helm and navigator positions into
a single conn station. The guidance in the section Ship
Stations and Facilities on page 186 is the basis for
this, but this section details specific actions characters
can undertake.
Each character may only operate a single station during
their turn, and you cannot take actions from a specific
station if another character is already at that station.
§ COMMAND: The commanding officer makes the
decisions based on the information available.
§ COMMUNICATIONS: This station covers all incom-
ing and outgoing communications, including encryp-
tion and decryption of messages.
§ FLIGHT CONTROLLER / HELMSMAN: The flight
controller, or helmsman, is the pilot of the ship—re-
sponsible for all tasks that require the ship’s move-
ment and maneuvering.
§ NAVIGATOR: The navigator oversees plotting the
ship’s course and determining the spatial conditions
that would affect the ship along its course.
§ OPERATIONS: This station covers any miscellaneous
monitoring and control of internal systems, such as
damage control, transporters, and life support.
§ SENSOR OPERATIONS: Sensor operations are
used to control the ship's varied external sensor
systems, used to scan planetary bodies, spatial
phenomena, other vessels, and more. It also covers
interpreting and analyzing that information, and the
information retrieved from probes.
§ TACTICAL: This station covers the operation of weap-
ons and shields.
CONFLICT
299
: . Standard Minor Actions
The following minor actions can be undertaken by personnel at all stations.
: . Starship Conflict Minor Actions
MINOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Change Position
The character moves to any other station on the bridge, or to any other location on the ship.
If that bridge station is unmanned, the character can take control of that station immediately;
otherwise, the character takes control whenever the officer already at that station departs. If the
character is moving to somewhere else on the ship, they will arrive in that location at the start of
their next turn.
Interact
The character interacts with an object in the environment. Particularly complex interactions may
require a major action (and a task) instead. This covers basic and routine interactions with ship
systems that aren’t otherwise covered here.
Prepare The character prepares for, or spends time setting up, a task. Some tasks require this minor action
to be taken before the task can be attempted.
Restore The character performs the minor repairs and adjustments needed to restore a system after
disruption or minor damage. Certain circumstances call for the use of this minor action.
: . Standard Major Actions
The following major actions can be undertaken by all stations.
: . Starship Conflict Major Actions
MAJOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Assist
Create Trait
Other Tasks
Override
Pass Ready
The character performs some activity that grants an ally an advantage. The character nominates a
single ally they can communicate with and assists their next task (see Teamwork and Assistance,
page 255). If a character attempts a task and you have not yet acted, you can give up your turn
this round to assist them immediately.
Create or change a trait in the scene, or remove one that’s already present. This is a task with
a Difficulty of 2, using an attribute + department and focus based on what you are doing. If
successful, you create, change, or remove a trait.
Perform a task at the discretion of the gamemaster. Circumstances or objectives may dictate a
task, and particularly dangerous situations may require working to overcome an extended task or
complete a challenge.
The character overrides the controls of another position. The character may attempt a major
action from any other position other than commanding officer, but increasing the Difficulty by 1,
due to the sub-optimal controls.
The character chooses not to attempt a task.
You choose another major action to take as a reaction to something else. When the trigger event
occurs, you temporarily interrupt the current character’s turn to resolve your readied major action,
then play proceeds as normal. If the triggering event does not occur before your next turn, the
action is lost. You can still perform minor actions during your turn.
300
CHAPTER 8
: . Command
A character in a command position oversees the rest of
the bridge crew, devising plans, coordinating any com-
plex actions, and maintaining morale.
A ship may have a second command position for the
executive officer if the ship has a Command rating of 4+.
Each character. can use any Command actions freely,
though the executive officer cannot give orders that
contradict the commanding officer.
: . Command Major Actions
MAJOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Assist Create Trait
Direct Rally In addition to the standard Assist action description on page 289, if you use the Assist action on
your turn while in command, you may pick two characters to assist, rather than one.
In addition to the standard Create Trait action description on page 289, note that while not unique
to command, this action is useful for characters in command, and usually uses Control, Insight, or
Reason + Command, to perform the task, normally representing battle plans, strategies, and similar.
Spend 1 Momentum and select one ally on the bridge who immediately attempts a single major
action, and you assist them by rolling 1d20 with your Control + Command.
You inspire and coordinate the crew, attempting a Presence + Command task with a Difficulty of 0;
this task is specifically to generate Momentum, either to use immediately or to save for the group.
: . Communications
A character at communications controls both internal
and external communications systems.
Interference or jamming can prevent external communi-
cations, and is normally represented by a trait.
Opening internal communications—to speak either to
the whole ship, or specific locations within the ship—is
a free action that can be done at any time, even during
another character’s actions.
Sending a hail can be done as a free action, as can re-
sponding to a hail received by another vessel or facility.
Other communications activities—encrypting and
securing sensitive transmissions (and receiving them),
intercepting hostile signals, and handling priority
internal communications (damage reports, security
alerts, coordinating repair teams)—can be handled
using the normal array of major actions, such as creat-
ing a trait or attempting a Difficulty 0 task to generate
Momentum.
: . Communications Major Actions
MAJOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Create Trait
Damage Control
Transport
In addition to the standard Create Trait action description on page 289, this action is often
useful for creating traits which represent efforts to boost or recalibrate communications to pierce
interference, or methods used to encrypt or decrypt messages. It can also be used to create traits
that represent coordinating personnel aboard the ship or coordinating with other ships.
You direct a damage control team to begin stabilizing and repairing damage. Choose a single
breach (see page 310), and attempt a Presence + Engineering task, with a Difficulty of 2;
increase this by 1 per additional degree of potency. If successful, the chosen breach is patched,
and no longer imposes any penalties or effects. The breach itself is not fully removed, which will
require proper repairs outside of combat.
You send instructions to one of the ship’s transporter rooms to beam a group of people or objects,
to or from the ship, or from one place to another. This follows the rules for transporters described
on page 190, but operating them from the bridge increases the Difficulty by 1.
CONFLICT
301
: . Helm
Flying the ship requires a combination of minor and major actions taken by a character at the helm (may be combined
with navigator into a conn position).
: . Helm Minor Actions
MINOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Impulse
Thrusters
Using the ship’s impulse engines, you fly the ship. You move up to 2 zones to anywhere within
Long range.
If you only move 1 zone, you may reduce the Momentum cost of movement through difficult or
hazardous terrain by 1.
Using the ship’s maneuvering thrusters, you make fine adjustments to the ship’s position. You may
move the ship to anywhere within your current zone, and you may move safely into Contact with
another ship, station, or other object (this may include docking with another vessel or landing).
: . Helm Major Actions
MAJOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Attack Pattern
Create Trait Evasive Action
Maneuver
Ram
Warp
You fly steadily to make it easier for your shipmates to target the enemy. If you take this action,
each time your ship makes an attack before your next turn, you may Assist on that attack, using
your Control + Conn. However, until your next turn, all attacks against the ship reduce their
Difficulty by 1.
In addition to the standard Create Trait action description on page 289, note that, from the helm,
this action is often useful for creating traits that reflect careful positioning or skilled maneuvering.
You maneuver the ship in a quick, unpredictable way to foil enemy targeting. If you take this
action, then until your next turn, all attacks against your ship become opposed tasks, opposed
using your Daring + Conn and assisted by the ship’s Structure + Conn. If you win the opposed
task, you may move the ship 1 zone. However, until the start of your next turn, all attacks made by
your ship suffer +1 Difficulty.
You cannot take this action if the ship is currently benefiting from the Defensive Fire action
(page 305).
You focus on carefully controlling the ship’s flight. Attempt a Control + Conn task with Difficulty 0,
assisted by the ship’s Engines + Conn. This is normally used to generate Momentum for crossing
difficult terrain.
You choose a single enemy vessel or other target within Close range and move into Contact with
them. This is an Attack, requiring a Daring + Conn task with a Difficulty of 2, assisted by the ship’s
Engines + Conn. If successful, the Attack inflicts the ship’s collision damage (see sidebar) on the
target, with the Intense quality, but suffers the target’s collision damage in return.
Requires Reserve Power. You must take a Prepare minor action to take this action.
Attempt a Control + Conn task with a Difficulty of 1, assisted by the ship’s Engines + Conn. If you
succeed, you move the ship a number of zones equal to the ship’s Engines score, or you leave the
battlefield entirely. See Going to Warp, page 295.
302
CHAPTER 8
: . Navigator
Where a navigator is present, their actions are typically used to create traits representing plotted courses or charted
hazards, or to assist the helm. This position may be combined with helm into a conn position.
: . Navigator Major Actions
MAJOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Assist Create Trait
When using the standard Assist action detailed on page 289, it’s common for a navigator to
assist the officer at the helm.
In addition to the standard Create Trait action description on page 289, note that, from the
navigator’s station, this action is often useful for creating traits that reflect plotting a careful
course or studying the terrain.
: . Operations/Engineering
A character at operations handles resource management, allocation of power, and technical assets. These actions can
also be performed from main engineering. A ship may have a second operations position as a separate station if it has an
Engineering rating of 4+.
: . Operations/Engineering Major Actions
MAJOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Create Trait Damage Control
Regain Power
Regenerate
Shields
Reroute Power Transport In addition to the standard Create Trait action description on page 289, note that, from
operations, this action is often useful for creating traits that reflect modifications to ship systems.
Choose a single breach and attempt a Presence + Engineering task, with a Difficulty of 2;
increase this by 1 per additional degree of Potency. If successful, the breach is patched, and no
longer imposes penalties or effects. The breach will require proper repairs outside of combat.
You draw energy from another system to replenish the ship’s Reserve Power. Attempt a Control
+ Engineering task, with a Difficulty of 1. This may Succeed at Cost. On success, you restore the
ship’s Reserve Power, allowing it to be used later during the scene. Complications should reflect
subsystems shutdown to use their power.
The Difficulty for this task increases by 1 each time it is attempted during a scene.
Requires Reserve Power. You reroute Reserve Power to the shield emitters, attempting to
restore their strength. This requires a Control + Engineering task with a Difficulty of 2, assisted
by the ship’s Structure + Engineering; the Difficulty increases by 1 if the ship’s shields are at
0. If successful, the ship regains shields equal to your Engineering department, plus 2 more by
spending 1 Momentum (Repeatable).
Requires Reserve Power. You reroute Reserve Power to a specific system; the chosen system gains
power which will apply to the next action using that system (as described on page 185).
You remotely operate the ship’s transporters. This follows the rules for transporters described on
page 190, but operating them from the bridge increases the Difficulty by 1.
CONFLICT
303
: . Sensor Operations
A character at sensor operations is the eyes and ears of the ship, and vital for ensuring that the rest of the crew have the
information they need to execute their tasks. A ship may have a second sensor operations position as a separate station
if it has an Science rating of 4+.
: . Sensor Operations Minor Actions
MINOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Calibrate Sensors You work to fine-tune the sensors to get the clearest readings. On your next Sensor Operations
action, you may either ignore a single trait affecting the task, or re-roll 1d20.
Launch Probe
You launch a sensor probe in order to study a situation or phenomenon in more depth or from a
safe distance. Select a single zone anywhere within Long range: you launch a probe which flies to
that zone. Sensor Operations major actions may determine range from the probe’s location rather
than the ship.
The probe can be targeted as if a Small Craft, and it is destroyed if it takes any damage.
The following major actions can be undertaken by characters at sensor operations. The Difficulty of these tasks can be
affected by interference, ambient conditions, and other unusual phenomena. They also increase in Difficulty by 1 for each
range category beyond Close.
: . Sensor Operations Major Actions
MAJOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Create Trait
Reveal
Scan For
Weakness
In addition to the standard Create Trait action description on page 289, note that, from sensor
operations, this action is often useful for creating traits that reflect important information that has
been detected or discovered.
You scan for the trace signals that may reveal the tell-tale presence of a cloaked vessel, or a
vessel concealed by some other phenomenon. Attempt a Reason + Science task, assisted by
the ship’s Sensors + Science, with a Difficulty of 3. If you succeed, and there is a hidden vessel
within Long range, you reveal which zone it is in (if there are multiple, this only reveals one such
vessel, chosen at random). Until that vessel moves, your ship may attack that hidden vessel, but
increasing the Difficulty by 2.
You scan an enemy vessel, looking for vulnerabilities. Choose a single vessel and attempt a Control
+ Science task with a Difficulty of 2, assisted by the ship’s Sensors + Security. If this succeeds, the
next attack made against that ship increases its damage by 2, or gains the Piercing quality.
Sensor Sweep
You use the sensors to scan for information. Select a single zone to scan, and attempt a Reason
+ Science task, assisted by the ship’s Sensors + Science, with a Difficulty of 1. If successful, the
gamemaster provides basic information on any ships, objects, or other phenomena in that zone;
you may spend Momentum to get extra information as normal.
304
CHAPTER 8
: . Tactical
A character at tactical operates the ship’s weapons and defensive systems. A ship may have a second tactical position as
a separate station if it has a Security rating of 4+
: . Tactical Minor Actions
MINOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Calibrate
Weapons
Prepare
Targeting
Solution
You fine-tune the frequency of energy weapons, and the yield of torpedoes to achieve a desired
result. On your next attack with the ship’s weapons, increase the weapon’s damage by 1.
The character prepares for, or spends time setting up, a task. Some tasks require this minor action
to be taken before the task can be attempted. At tactical, this action can be used to raise or lower
the ship’s shields, or to arm or disarm the ship’s weapons.
§ Shields: When the shields are lowered, the ship’s maximum shields are 0. When raised, they
are restored to their normal maximum, or to their previous total if the ship has taken any
damage this scene.
§ Weapons: The ship may only make Weapons Attacks if the weapons are armed. However,
enemy ships can detect whether your ship’s weapons are armed.
You lock targeting sensors onto an enemy vessel. Select a single enemy vessel within Long range.
On the next attack against that vessel, either re-roll a d20 on the task, or choose which of the
target’s systems are hit by the attack, rather than rolling.
: . Tactical Major Actions
MAJOR ACTION DESCRIPTION
Create Trait
Defensive Fire
Fire
Modulate Shields Tractor Beam
In addition to the standard Create Trait action description on page 289, note that, from tactical,
this action is often useful for creating traits that reflect modifications to weapon systems, or
useful targeting data.
Choose a single energy weapon on your ship. Until your next turn, any enemy attack against your
ship becomes an opposed task, opposed by your Daring + Security (and assisted by your ship’s
Weapons + Security). If you succeed, you may spend 2 Momentum to counterattack, inflicting
your weapon’s damage against the attacker.
You cannot take this action if the ship is currently benefitting from Evasive Action (page 302).
You select a single energy weapon or a single torpedo weapon on the ship, choose a target for
that weapon, and make an Attack following the process on page 306. If you attempt a torpedo
attack, add 1 Threat.
This cannot be attempted if the shields are at 0. You try to tune your shields to resist enemy
attacks. If you take this action, then until your next turn, increase the Resistance of your ship by 2.
The character engages a tractor beam at a nearby object or vessel. This requires a Control +
Security task, assisted by the ship’s Structure + Security with a Difficulty of 2, and can only be
directed at a target within Close range.
If successful, the target vessel is immobilized and cannot move unless it can break free. This can be
done in a number of ways, but the Difficulty is equal to the tractor beam strength of your vessel.
CONFLICT
305
ATTACKS, HAZARDS, AND DAMAGE
SPACE IS DANGEROUS, FULL OF PERILS AND HAZ-
ards, not least of which is the risk of conflict with pirates,
raiders, and hostile civilizations.
Certain actions—Evasive Action and Defensive Fire—al-
low the crew to turn an attack against their ship into an
opposed task. When you attempt an opposed task, the
reactive character first rolls to set the Difficulty. They
gather a dice pool, rolling against their own target num-
ber as if they were making a task roll. However, they are
not rolling against any specific Difficulty; just count how
many successes they score. Only one of these actions
may be in use at any one time: if you have used Evasive
Action, you cannot use Defensive Fire until after the
effects of Evasive Action have ended, and vice-versa.
DAMAGE AND REPAIRS
WHEN A VESSEL IS SUCCESSFULLY HIT BY AN AT-
tack, the hit inflicts damage. Some environmental
hazards also come with a risk of damage, such as grav-
itational stresses, intense radiation, corrosive gasses,
micro-meteors, extreme heat, and ionic discharges.
Attacks and other hazards have a damage rating, which
is a number, typically between 1 and 6, though some es-
pecially powerful weapons have a higher damage rating.
Damage for starships is resolved like an extended task
(page 271). However, the full process is described
below.
Ships have a quantity of shields, representing the
strength of the ship’s deflector shields, which are
used to protect the ship from damage. Shields function
similarly to the Progress track of an extended task.
A ship’s normal maximum shields are equal to the ship’s
Structure plus its Scale and Security.
306
CHAPTER 8
MARC BELL
ATTEMPTING A STARSHIP ATTACK
1
SELECT ATTACK: When you make a starship attack, the Attack action chosen
will determine the type of weapon used—typically energy weapons or torpe-
does. If your ship has multiple weapons, choose one to Attack with.
2
SELECT TARGET: Choose a single vessel or another viable target
visible to your ship. Some weapons have a limited range; you cannot
choose a target beyond this limited range.
3
ATTEMPT ATTACK: Attempt a Control + Security task, assisted by the ship’s
Weapons + Security, with a Difficulty determined by the Attack action chosen. For
an energy weapon, the Difficulty is 2. For torpedoes, the Difficulty is 3. For a Ram
Attack (see page 302), the Difficulty is 2.
4
RESOLVE ATTACK:
If the task is success-
ful, it inflicts damage
(see opposite). Roll on
the Random System
Hit table to determine
which system was hit;
the Targeting Solutions
minor action allows you
to select a choice.
: . Random System Hit
D20 SYSTEM
1 Communications
2 Computers
3–6 Engines
7–9 Sensors
10-17 Structure
18–20 Weapons
 Starship Combat Momentum Spends
The following table provides additional options avail-
able to a character when they generate one or more
Momentum in combat.
These are in addition to the uses of Momentum (page
293), and any others players or gamemaster create
themselves.
: . Starship Combat Momentum Spends
MOMENTUM SPEND DESCRIPTION
Added Damage
(2 Momentum, Repeatable) Devastating Attack
(2 Momentum)
Increase the damage of a successful attack by 1 for every 2 Momentum spent.
Roll an additional system; that system suffers a hit dealing half the attack’s
damage, rounding up.
CONFLICT
307
 Cover and Concealment
Cover and Concealment are common effects, repre-
senting objects that interfere with a vessel’s ability to
see or attack a target directly. Cover interferes with
attacks against a vessel, while concealment makes it
more difficult to detect and target a vessel. A zone pro-
viding cover or concealment functions as a trait which
attacks harder or even impossible. It may also provide
potential other dangers—a nebula full of volatile gas
may be risky to fire through, in addition to providing cov-
er. This can be justification to increase the complication
range of attacks.
EXAMPLE: The U.S.S. Enterprise has flown into the
Mutara nebula, pursued by the U.S.S. Reliant. The
nebula itself is dense and highly ionized, which inter-
feres with sensors and shields.
The nebula has two traits: Ionized Dust and Gas and
Static Discharge. The gamemaster rules that Ionized
Dust and Gas interferes with sensors and targeting:
ships are completely concealed from one anoth-
er past Close range, and tasks to detect or attack
another vessel at Close range increase in Difficulty by
+1. Static Discharge prevents any ship within from
raising shields.
Cover can often be circumvented by attacking from a
different direction or by using some force to displace
the cover. Concealment can often be circumvented
by finding other ways to detect a target’s position and
movement.
An environment filled with zones of cover and conceal-
ment can completely change the nature of a conflict, as
both sides maneuver and attempt to fight or evade.
After several minutes without contact, both ships
pass into the same zone. Reliant opens fire and the
Enterprise attempts to evade.. This would normally be
a Difficulty 2 attack, but the Enterprise is taking evasive
action, making it an opposed task, and the nebula in-
creases the Difficulty by 1. A difficult attack, but Reliant
succeeds, and hits.
At the start of a new scene, a ship’s shields return to
their maximum value. As with some extended task
tracks, a ship’s shields have two Breakthrough points,
one halfway along the track (round up), and one
three-quarters of the way along the track (round up).
Most ships also have a quantity of Resistance which
reduces total damage received, allowing them to reduce
how much damage they take from attacks. Resistance is
derived from the ship’s Scale and Structure (page 185),
and from talents affecting the hull and shields.
EXAMPLE SHIELD TRACK
If a ship is shaken, it has suffered minor damage or dis-
ruption. The ship’s captain or highest-ranking character
aboard randomly determines or chooses one option
from the following list. NPC ships always choose Brace
for Impact!
: . Shaken: Minor Damage Results
D20 MINOR DAMAGE EFFECT
1–6 7–12 13–18 Brace for Impact! On the next turn this ship (or a character aboard this ship) takes, they may
not take a major action.
Losing Power! If you have Reserve Power, lose the use of Reserve Power. The next time
you attempt to Regain Power, the Difficulty is increased by 1.
Casualties and Minor Damage The ship suffers a complication.
19–20 Roll Again Roll on this table again.
308
CHAPTER 8
STARSHIP DAMAGE
DETERMINE DAMAGE: Your damage rating is determined by the weapon used,
which may be modified by talents or other factors.
1
§ RESISTANCE: If the target ship has any Resistance, reduce your damage by 1
for each point of Resistance, to a minimum of 1.
§ COMPLICATIONS: A complication on an Attack may reduce your damage by
1 for each complication suffered—in essence, the complication means that
the Attack had less effect than expected. Refer to page 326 in Chapter 9:
Gamemastering for more details on complications.
APPLY DAMAGE: Reduce the target ship’s shields by 1 for each point of damage (after ap-
plying Resistance and other modifiers). If the ship’s shields were already 0, the ship suffers
a breach instead. Otherwise, check the ship’s current shields against the three conditions
below, and apply all of which are true.
2
§ SHIELDS AT 50%: If the damage reduces the ship’s shields to below half its maximum
value, the ship is shaken, with the commanding officer (or highest-ranking character)
picking a damage result from the table below.
§ SHIELDS AT 25%: If the damage reduces the ship’s shields to below one quarter of its
maximum value, the ship is shaken, as above. If the ship was already shaken from that
attack (from the shields at 50% condition, above), then the ship suffers a breach instead,
as damage punches through the shields.
§ SHIELDS ARE DOWN: If the damage reduces the ship’s shields to 0, the shields are
down, and the ship suffers a breach.
 Collision Damage
There are times when a ship may collide with another.
This may happen accidentally—such as when a ship is
attempting to dock or land and suffers a complication—or
deliberately, by ramming. When one ship collides with an-
other, each ship takes the other ship’s collision damage.
A ship’s collision damage rating is equal to the ship’s
Scale, plus half the number of zones moved before the
the collision. This has the Devastating and Piercing qual-
ities. In addition, if a ship is ramming, then the ramming
vessel gains the Intense quality as well.
EXAMPLE: The U.S.S. Odyssey encounters a squad-
ron of Jem’Hadar attack ships. The Odyssey has
already suffered considerable damage: she’s taken 5
breaches and has no shields remaining. A Jem’Hadar
ship hurtles towards the Odyssey, intending to ram.
The Jem'Hadar ship’s collision damage is 4—the
ship’s Scale of 3, +1 for the two zones it moved
before ramming, and it has the Devastating, Intense,
and Piercing qualities. The Jem’Hadar ship scores
2 Momentum on the attack, causing a Devastating
Attack, inflicting a second hit for 2 damage to another
system. Due to the Piercing quality, this Attack ig-
nores the Odyssey’s Resistance, and each hit inflicts
another breach. The Odyssey is destroyed. The
Jem’Hadar ship suffers 7 damage from the Odyssey:
6 for the ship’s Scale, +1 for the distance moved. it is
likewise destroyed.
CONFLICT
309
MARC BELL
 Breaches and
Potent Traits
Multiple identical traits can be combined to create a
Potent trait, with a Potency rating noted after the trait’s
name. The rating is equal to the number of traits com-
bined in this way—three traits representing dense smoke
would be combined into Dense Smoke 3, for example.
As breaches are a form of trait, this can be a useful way
to handle especially severe damage inflicted, such as if a
single attack inflicts multiple breaches. Hull Breach 2 is
more severe than Impulse Drive Offline, and as the for-
mer is essentially two traits, it will have a greater effect,
and be more difficult and time-consuming to repair.
When it comes to repairing these Potent breaches,
the gamemaster can either multiply the time taken to
attempt repairs by the trait’s Potency (i.e., a breach with
Potency 2 takes twice as long to fix), or turn a simple
task into an extended task.
310
CHAPTER 8
EXAMPLE: The U.S.S Titan-A has engaged the Shrike in
combat, and is hit by the Shrike's disruptors. The Shrike's
disruptors have a damage rating of 9, but the gamemas-
ter spends 4 Threat to increase the damage to 11. The
Titan has a Resistance of 5, which reduces the damage
to 6. The Titan has 14 of its 17 shields remaining, and
this hit reduces the Titan's shields to 8. As the Titan took
enough damage to reduce it to less than half shields, it
is shaken. Because of this, the captain chooses to Brace
for Impact, so on the next turn taken by one of the Titan's
crew, they will be unable to take a major action.
A breach is a trait which represents serious damage to
the ship and/or crew, and is associated with the system
of the ship struck by the attack or hazard. As a trait, its
usual effect is to increase the Difficulty of tasks attempt-
ed or make some tasks impossible.
SYSTEMS DESTROYED AND CRITICAL DAMAGE
If a single system on your ship suffers a number of
breaches equal to or greater than half the ship’s Scale,
the system has been destroyed. When a system has
been destroyed, any task which would be assisted by
that system automatically fails.
If your ship suffers a number of breaches greater than
the ship’s Scale, then the ship has suffered critical dam-
age and can no longer function. No further actions can
 Warp Core
Breach Imminent!
Catastrophic damage to the engines is a serious matter,
increasing the risk of losing containment over the
volatile reactors that power the ship. The ships of many
cultures, including the Federation, rely on powerful mat-
ter/antimatter reactions, which can cause catastrophic
explosions if uncontrolled, while the Romulans use a
similarly dangerous artificial singularity to power their
warp engines.
If a ship suffers critical damage and the ship’s Engines
system has been destroyed, the reactor suffers a loss of
containment and may explode at any moment. Roll a d20
at the end of each round. If you roll higher than the ship’s
Engineering rating, the reactors explode, destroying the
ship, killing all aboard, and inflicting X damage with the
Piercing quality to all other ships within Close range,
where X is the exploding ship’s Scale +1.
This result can be avoided. Characters in Engineering
may attempt to Stabilize the Reactor or Eject the Reactor
(though not all ships have the capability to eject their re-
actors, so their crews may wish to abandon ship instead).
§ STABILIZE THE REACTOR: This is an extended task,
with a Progress track equal to the ship’s Engines, and
a base Difficulty of 3. Success prevents the reactor
from exploding. Common combinations for this
include Daring or Control + Engineering.
§ EJECT THE REACTOR: This is a Daring +
Engineering task with a Difficulty of 2. Success
means the reactor is successfully ejected. If ejected,
continue to roll to see if it explodes; when it does, it
will not destroy the ship outright, but all ship, includ-
ing the one that ejected it, within Close range suffer
damage when it detonates.
be taken if the ship has taken critical damage. If the ship
takes any additional breaches, it is destroyed.
At the gamemaster’s discretion, NPC vessels suffering
critical damage are destroyed.
: . Repairing Damage
If a ship has suffered breaches, characters can attempt
tasks to try to repair the damage. These will not be full
repairs, as this would take time and resources not read-
ily available in battle, but starships are designed with
redundancies and back-ups and a skilled engineer can
reroute around damaged systems to create impromptu
solutions.
 All Hands,
Abandon Ship!
If a ship has suffered critical damage, or is otherwise in
some other desperate situation it cannot escape, the
commanding officer may give the order to abandon
ship. Starships are fitted with large numbers of escape
pods, each of which can hold a small number of crew
and allow them to either survive in space for a short
while, or to fly to a nearby planet and await rescue.
These, along with the ship’s complement of shuttlec-
raft—and if near enough to a planet or allied ship, trans-
porters—allows the ship’s crew to evacuate.
Boarding and launching an escape pod requires a
Change Position minor action, and a Daring + Conn task
with a Difficulty of 0. Each escape pod is designed to
carry four individuals, but can carry up to six if necessary
(though more people reduces the life support capabilities
of the pod). Launching a shuttle is covered on page 189.
For the rest of the crew, it can be assumed that at least
half the personnel on board escaped the ship by the
end of the round in which the abandon ship order was
given. The other half will leave in the following round.
All those who serve or live aboard a starship have been
trained and drilled to respond quickly to emergencies.
What happens to the ship and her crew after they’ve
abandoned ship is up to the gamemaster to determine.
CONFLICT
311
 Long-Term Repairs
Completely repairing damage to a starship is a difficult
and time-consuming process, but one that most star-
ships from the 23rd century onwards are capable of per-
forming. Widespread use of matter synthesizers and tool
replicators enable crews to produce replacement parts
and carry out large-scale repairs that were impossible
outside of a dedicated dock in the 22nd century.
This can often be handled between adventures, “off-
screen” after the end of one mission but before the start
of the next. Alternatively, a return to a spacedock for
repairs can be used to set up for the next mission, or to
introduce a change of pace to an ongoing campaign.
A single breach can be repaired within 6 hours of
work. If the repair teams can work undisturbed,
no task roll is needed, and the work is completed.
If there is peril or time pressure, the gamemaster
may ask for a task (normally Control + Engineering,
with a Difficulty of 3, reduced to 2 if that breach was
patched), taking about 6 hours to complete. A ship
The Damage Control major action listed on page 303
is a typical way of repairing a damaged system, repre-
senting a character sending a repair team to handle the
repairs. However, this is not the only way to repair dam-
age; using the Change Position minor action to move
elsewhere in the ship, a character can head to the site of
the damage and attempt to perform the repairs person-
ally. This is a Daring + Engineering task.
Regardless of which method is used, the Difficulty for
these actions are set by the breach suffered. This will
normally be 2, but will increase by 1 for each additional
breach to the same system.
Damage Control removes the penalties imposed by a
breach, but cannot remove the breaches that caused
those conditions: the repairs patch the breach—seal-
ing off damaged areas, rerouting power and computer
connections, and so forth—rather than perform a full
repair. As a result, if a damaged system is repaired, and
then suffers an additional breach, any existing patched
breaches on that system also return. Breaches cannot
be fully repaired in combat or during an adventure; in-
stead, such intensive repairs require extensive work, and
may take days or more to complete.
312
CHAPTER 8
can carry out a number of simultaneous repairs equal
to the ship’s Engineering rating.
Being docked at a properly-equipped station or star-
base reduces the Difficulty of these tasks by 2 and
allows them to be completed in half the half the time.
Such repairs are a valuable opportunity for the crew to
take shore leave while the work is completed.
EXAMPLE: After clashing with the U.S.S. Equinox,
Voyager is damaged, with three breaches: “Hull
Breach on Deck 4”, “Phaser Arrays Offline”, and
“Impulse Engines Offline”. Stranded in the Delta
Quadrant, Voyager cannot just return to Spacedock for
repairs: the crew will need to make these repairs them-
selves. Voyager, by this point, has an Engineering de-
partment of 3 and can thus devote three Engineering
teams to repairs, enough to work on all three breaches
at once. Lt. Torres coordinates her repair teams, mak-
ing Control + Engineering tasks for all three, each with
a Difficulty of 2 (having patched the breaches earlier).
STARSHIP COMBAT
EXAMPLE 1
The Enterprise has been attacked and damaged by a
Gorn Hunter, and is hidden within the atmosphere of a
brown dwarf, unable to see the attacker or be seen by
them. There are four player characters on the bridge—
Captain Pike, Lieutenant Noonien-Singh, Lieutenant
Spock, and Lieutenant Ortegas.
Each round, Pike, La’an, Spock, and Ortegas receive
one turn, and spend their actions controlling Enterprise
from their stations. The Gorn Hunter, a Scale 3 vessel,
receives three turns. Spock takes the first turn, spend-
ing his action Creating a Trait, Jury-rigged Navigation
Sensors, allowing the Enterprise to detect the Gorn ship.
The gamemaster has the Gorn take one turn to move,
and then Keeps the Initiative to use another turn to try to
detect Enterprise, which fails.
The gamemaster then hands back to the players:
Pike uses the Direct action, ordering Ortegas to move
Enterprise into position above the Gorn ship (the Attack
Pattern action), and then keeps the initiative so La’an
can deploy a torpedo. The Gorn ship is destroyed.
STARSHIP COMBAT EXAMPLE 2
The U.S.S. Defiant is on its way to Earth, but is intercept-
ed by the U.S.S. Lakota. At this point in the mission, the
player characters have 3 Momentum and the gamemas-
ter has 15 Threat.
The Defiant deals 8 damage, which Kira spends 2
Momentum—free from the phasers’ Versatile 2 quality—
to boost to 9, and saves the rest for later. After reduction
Resistance, the Lakota’s shields are reduced from 18 to 14.
The Defiant is commanded by Lt. Commander Worf,
with Lt. Commander Dax at the helm, Chief O’Brien
at operations, and Major Kira at tactical, each of
whom get a turn during each round. The Lakota is an
Excelsior-class starship with Exceptional NPCs, and is
Scale 5, and thus receives five turns each round.
As it’s still the first round of combat, Worf’s Quick to
Action talent means the player characters can Keep the
Initiative for free. With that, Dax takes the next action,
moving at Impulse to close the distance with the Lakota,
and taking Evasive Action.
The Lakota’s weapons are armed and her shields are up.
As the Defiant enters weapons range, the crew raises
shields and powers up weapons. The gamemaster
spends 1 Threat to take the first turn.
The Lakota opens fire with her phaser banks. The
gamemaster spends 3 Threat to buy two extra d20s.
With 4d20, and an assist die from the ship, the gam-
emaster rolls 6 successes, which hits and generates 4
Momentum, plus 2 bonus Momentum from the Versatile
2 quality on the phasers. The gamemaster spends all 6
Momentum to increase damage from 7 to 10.
The action passes back to the Lakota. Once more, the
gamemaster spends 1 Threat to take an additional
Weapons task, firing phasers. Due to Dax’s Evasive
Action, this is now an opposed task. Dax rolls 5 and
13, and O’Brien rolls 4 for the Defiant’s assist die, and
the two score 4 successes total. The gamemaster
rolls 13 and 20, plus 1 on the assist die for the Lakota,
for 3 successes total. As Dax won the opposed task,
she moves the Defiant an extra space (as per Evasive
Action), setting up for a new attack run. The gamemas-
ter rules that the complication prevents the Lakota
from Keeping the Initiative, and leaves an opening for
the Defiant to act.
The Defiant has Resistance 6, so the attack inflicts 4
damage, reducing the Defiant’s shields from 16 to 12.
The gamemaster spends 2 Threat to Keep the Initiative
and take another turn. The gamemaster spends an-
other 1 Threat to take a second action assisted by the
ship’s Weapons and spends 1 Threat for an extra d20
on the attack.
O’Brien takes the next turn, rerouting power to weap-
ons. He uses his More Power talent as well, spending 2
Momentum to reroute power to Structure. Then, thanks
to Worf’s Quick to Action talent, he Keeps the Initiative,
handing the action to Kira, who fires the phase pulse
cannons again. She spends 1 Momentum to buy an
extra die, as the attack is more difficult this time.
With 3d20 and a ship’s assist die, the gamemaster
rolls 5 successes, hitting the Defiant and generating 3
Momentum, plus two extra from Versatile 2. The gam-
emaster spends 4 Momentum to increase the damage
to 9, and banks the last point as Threat. Defiant takes 3
damage, and her shields are reduced to 9.
Kira’s roll is exceptional: a 1, 3, and 7, and the ship’s
assist die is already set to 1 thanks to the rerouted pow-
er—7 successes in total. The Difficulty of the attack is
increased to 3 due to Dax’s Evasive Action, but Kira still
succeeds and generates 4 Momentum. Kira spends all
6 Momentum—2 free from Versatile 2, and everything
from the task—to boost the damage to 11.
The players decide to fight back. Worf uses the Direct
action, ordering Kira to target the Lakota’s weapons. It
costs 1 Momentum to use the Direct action, and Kira
spends 1 Momentum to buy an extra d20. Kira rolls 10,
11, and 16, Worf rolls a 1 for his assist, and O’Brien rolls
a 13 for the Defiant’s assist: 5 successes in total, which
beats the Difficulty of 2, and generates 3 Momentum.
The Lakota’s shields are reduced to 8. The Lakota is
shaken, as her shields are now below 50%.
At this point, all the player characters have taken a turn,
but the Lakota still has two more turns to take. The first
doesn’t include a major action, as the Lakota was shak-
en. On the second, the Lakota contacts Earth. With that,
the first round ends.
CONFLICT
313
CHAPTER 9
GAMEMASTERING
9.1 Managing The Rules 316
9.2 Extended Tasks and
Challenges 329
AUREA FRENIERE
315
: . CHAPTER 9.1
MANAGING THE RULES
“Alright, buckos, prepare for your trek amongst
the stars! Oh! Before I forget_let’s rock and roll!
- Zefram Cochrane hologram
EACH ADVENTURE IS COMPOSED OF
several scenes, with you and the players
all having opportunities to drive the
action and determine what happens
next. This will play out something like
the flowchart detailed below:
NARRATIVE FLOWCHART
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
COMMODORE
NELLA XEN
Knowing when to ask
for tasks, challenges,
or extended tasks is a
judgment call for you to
make as gamemaster.
The rules are intended
as guidance rather
than requirements, and
it is always your choice
to bend, break, or
even abandon certain
rules depending on
the situation. Sort of
like how I approach
the Prime Directive,
but that’s a topic for
another day.
DESCRIBE THE SCENE: Describe the scene, based on how
previous scenes concluded. It’s useful to think about a few key
elements: who is present, what is happening, where and when is
the scene occurring, and why are these events happening.
ESTABLISH TRAITS: Note any traits applicable to the current
scene. This picks out the most significant or most obvious
elements of the scene, and provides players with a few obvious
things to interact with.
ACT OR REACT: The players tell you what action they want to
attempt. This might be handled in a freeform manner, or it might
be structured, with a specific player order.
RESOLVE ACTION: With the players, determine the outcome of
their selected actions.
NARRATE THE OUTCOME: Respond to the selected actions,
describing what happens as a result.
REPEAT: A scene may be complete with only a single action,
or the players may wish to take more actions in response to the
consequences they’ve just faced.
END THE SCENE: Once the scene is complete, provide narra-
tion to wrap things up and transition to the next scene.
316
CHAPTER 9
: . Framing the Action
It’s your responsibility to establish each scene: scenes
are the structure within which action happens and
provide the shape for the situations characters confront
and overcome (or fail to overcome). Consider five core
questions about a scene when establishing it. These
questions shouldn’t take long to answer, and many
will have obvious answers, especially as the game
progresses.
1. WHAT? A scene is not worth playing out unless
something of note is happening. This could be a goal
of the player characters, the motivations of some
adversary, or some event completely independent of
either protagonist or antagonist.
2. WHEN? Time can be as important as place. This
can be absolute, with locations changing at different
points in time, but it could also be relative, with the
amount of time passed since the previous scene af-
fecting the readiness of adversaries or the aftermath
of previous events.
3. WHERE? Where a scene occurs defines the terrain
and likely occupants. A busy shopping promenade is
a different environment to an isolated forest clear-
ing, in terms of terrain and the type of scene likely to
occur there.
4. WHO? This might be allies, adversaries, bystanders,
or a mixture. Consider other characters nearby who
aren’t present in the scene immediately, but who
might arrive—such as reinforcements or characters
due to arrive at a specific time.
5. WHY? This is also crucial, though you may keep this
secret—determining why something is happening
can be the players’ drive to continue the adventure.
When you establish a scene, you may answer these
questions in any way you see fit, but the answers should
have a reasonable link to the mission or to the player
characters’ actions. A scene should follow logically
from the scene before it, and most scenes should be
driven by the players’ decisions as to where to go and
what to do.
Things may not always play out as the players desire.
There’s nothing to prevent you from ambushing the
group on the way to another destination or to have the
scene involve some factor the players didn’t predict.
This balancing act is part of the challenge of being a
gamemaster: balancing the players’ choices and inten-
tions with the influence of things beyond their control.
Too much in favor of players, and the game may seem
predictable or lacking challenge; too many things out-
side of player control may make the players feel like they
can’t make an impact.
: . Adding scene details
Once the fundamental questions of the scene are
answered, your next job is to flesh out the scene and
present it to the players. This has two aspects: narrative
and mechanical, which feed into one another.
The narrative side of this is describing what the player
characters can perceive—the sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, and sensations of being in the scene.
The mechanical side relies on that description and
builds upon it. The most important details present in the
scene are represented as traits, as described in Chapter
7 (page 250). You should point out a few traits for the
scene, which serve both as part of the scene description
and highlight elements the players might want to inter-
act with or overcome.
Some of these traits may be advantageous or problem-
atic for the player characters, but most traits established
at the start of a scene should not inherently favor one
side or the other, such as Crowded Streets or Dark or
Howling Wind.
: . Threat
While you don’t have to spend Threat for anything you
introduce as part of establishing a scene, that doesn’t
mean Threat should be ignored when you establish a
scene. You may wish to consider a few different ways
Threat could be gained or used during that scene and
establish those possibilities in your scene description.
An example might be describing an alarm, which could
be triggered to add to Threat, and the fact there are oth-
er enemies nearby which could be called in by spending
Threat. Alternatively, unstable terrain could be a few
points of Threat away from crumbling or collapsing,
shifting the scene’s terrain.
: . Playing Things Out
When the scene begins, players take the lead, and you
step back. Where setting scenes is within your control,
it is within scenes the characters have an opportunity
to shine. Help the players show off their characters,
GAMEMASTERING
317
 Scene Framing Tricks
There are a few methods for you to vary scene framing
to produce different effects, feelings, and styles. Using
them separately, or in conjunction with one another, can
give you more ways to frame new scenes.
§ WHY ARE YOU HERE? Sometimes a scene begins
without a clear idea of why the player characters are
there. Asking each player why their character is pres-
ent can both inform the situation and provide ideas
and context you may not have thought of.
§ FRAMING AFTER ARRIVAL: You do not need to
frame a scene with the characters walking in the front
door. Often, what the characters want to achieve is
already known when the scene is established, so it’s
especially if that means confronting those characters
with challenging obstacles to overcome and deadly
perils to survive. Watching how a character reacts when
things are hard is often the most satisfying way to en-
gage with the game and the story.
During a scene, you rely on the actions of NPCs and
Threat spends to alter scenes and encounters and
respond to player characters' actions. This places the
player characters in the center of the action, while giving
you the tools to intensify the tension.
Regardless of how the action is resolved, you are
responsible for describing what happens next. The
situation changes in response to the actions of charac-
ters, both those of the player characters and NPCs. You
may ask the players for input, especially when the action
involves them but you decide how the world around the
player characters responds to those actions.
This response can take many forms. The players’ actions
could see the scene concluded, with the consequenc-
es influencing the next scene, or those actions could
be one small part of a larger sequence of events, with
adversaries and allies taking their own actions, which in
turn prompt more actions from the player characters.
Aside from the actions of NPCs, you can influence a
scene by spending Threat. These opportunities are often
elements of the scene itself, described when the scene
is introduced, or created by the actions of characters
within the scene.
318
CHAPTER 9
sometimes useful to skip the ‘empty space’ of the
scene. Instead of describing the characters arriving,
describe them already there or leaving.
§ IN MEDIAS RES: This is a Latin phrase meaning “in
the middle of things”. Starting a scene in the middle
of the action—during a chase, a gunfight, an intense
interrogation, or similar—is an interesting way to
shake things up. Used at the start of an adventure, it
can also be referred to as a “cold open”, especially
when combined with “Why Are You Here?”. These
kinds of scenes will often lead into, or foreshadow,
something later, but an alternative type of In Medias
Res introduction may have nothing to do with the
main plot (or appear to have nothing to do with it).
: . Wrapping Things Up
Concluding a scene is as important as starting a new
one; how you end one scene will feed into the start of
the next scene.
A scene concludes at a point where there is nothing
worthwhile left to do in that place and time. If the players
decide they want to leave the area, call for a new scene.
If the players haven’t anything else to do right now—
perhaps they’re waiting for the results of analysis, or for
repairs to be completed, or they’re waiting in place for
an enemy to arrive—call for a new scene. If the group is
split (perhaps between the ship and an away team) and
the action needs to move to another part of the group,
call for a new scene.
In most cases, it should be obvious when a scene has
ended, as scenes tend to come to a natural conclusion
by themselves. You could conclude a scene prematurely
by using the Reversal Threat spend (page 328), but this
should be rare as it is costly.
Concluding a scene often starts with a brief description
of the state things are in as the scene ends, especially if
the scene is dramatic or action-packed.
You should then ask the players what they want to do
next (if they haven’t already made their intentions clear).
This should provide a direction to take the adventure,
even if things don’t turn out quite how the players
expect.
Alongside this, attend to minor rules “upkeep”: remind
the players to end any other effects that last until the end
of the scene (most complications fall into this category),
regain use of the ship’s Reserve Power, restore the ship’s
Shields to full, and remove a point from the Momentum
pool (if there is any).
foundation for later adventures, or provide inspiration for
complications and uses of Threat in later scenes.
You should also think about the events that took place in
the scene, and then consider if any of them have long-
term consequences or repercussions, or if there are any
threads or elements of the scene which haven’t yet been
resolved. These may not be immediately relevant in the
next scene, but they might impact later scenes, lay the
A scene does not need to be lengthy; it does not need
to include all or even most of the characters, and it
doesn’t need to include any dice rolls. A scene could
be a brief conversation between two characters or an
opportunity for a player to describe what their char-
acter is doing during the time between scenes. These
scenes can fill in the gaps between the bigger, more
complex scenes, and can be valuable opportunities to
roleplay, create character depth, and build connections
among characters.
TASKS
ALMOST ANY ACTIVITY WHERE THERE IS DOUBT IN
the outcome, where failure or complications are interest-
ing, or where the degree of success is important can be
regarded as a task. A single task represents an activity
attempting to succeed despite resistance or conflict.
Tasks should be actions completed in a short amount of
time: searching for clues, repairing a shuttle, or negotiat-
ing with the leaders of an unknown alien culture
: . Task Difficulty
Difficulty represents how challenging a task is, based
on environment, opposition, obstacles, and similar
factors. Traits are a key part of this, and while most
basic tasks have a Difficulty of 1 or 2, remember you set
the final Difficulty, and thus can increase the required
number of successes accordingly. If it feels appropriate
for a situation to increase the task's Difficulty, you have
the freedom to do so. Traits representing hazardous
VITALI TIMKIN
GAMEMASTERING
319
environments, obscurity of information, a lack of prepa-
ration or appropriate tools, or other problems can all
increase the task Difficulty.
: . Risks, Costs, and
Consequences
Structuring the timing of these Difficulties in a game
session can also be a consideration. Starting a scene
with a Difficulty 4 or 5 task isn’t recommended unless
the scene absolutely demands it; there’s always the
possibility to ramp up task Difficulty as the action pro-
gresses, using complications and by spending Threat.
Alternatively, if something is necessary for the story to
continue, keep the Difficulty low or allow Success at
Cost to ensure a failed task doesn't stall progress.
A crucial part of adjudicating a task is considering the
effects of failure. If the task is to avoid some dangerous
effect or situation, the effects of failure are obvious:
the character didn’t avoid the danger. But in situations
where a character is attempting to achieve something,
it is important to determine what may happen if they fail
to achieve their goal; if there’s no cost or consequence
for their failure, then why didn’t they just succeed
automatically?
Risks, costs, and consequences are different ways to ex-
press ‘what goes wrong’. There’s some overlap between
the three ideas, but in general, they can be described as
follows:
If you’re in a situation where a task should reasonably
be very difficult, but you feel that a high-Difficulty task
would hinder play, you can break the task up into a
challenge made of several easier tasks. Each task would
then provide a partial success but allow the overall
problem to still feel challenging. Challenges are detailed
more fully on page 332.
Environmental traits adjust the task Difficulty, based on
whether they are beneficial in some ways and problem-
atic in others: a heavily-crowded area may make it easier
to avoid notice, but it’ll make rapid movement more dif-
ficult. Think about the circumstances of a scene, taking
note of the traits, and judge the Difficulty accordingly.
§ A risk might happen because of a task. It isn’t guaran-
teed to happen, but it could occur if the player suffers
a complication. It doesn’t change whether the task
succeeds, but it might change the outcome.
§ A cost must be paid or faced to get a desired out-
come, but can be avoided. This turns up with the
option to Succeed at Cost, but you may frame a cost
for allowing a task to be attempted in the first place.
§ A consequence will happen because of action; it
might be the result of a failed task, or it might come
automatically if the task is attempted.
Finally, make judgements based on the mood and
preferences of the players. Few groups enjoy constant-
ly having to beat the odds by facing an abundance of
Difficulty 4 or 5 tasks, while some revel in rising to such
challenges. If the group has just faced off against a pow-
erful opponent, tension will have been running high, so
allowing a few easier tasks will help release that tension,
giving players a bit of a break and allowing them to gen-
erate some much-needed Momentum. And sometimes
players just have a string of unlucky rolls; nobody thinks
poorly of a gamemaster who eases off the pressure
when the dice are falling badly, if it allows the fun and
the story to continue.
When setting the Difficulty for a task, consider what
could go wrong. These can naturally serve as inspiration
for how to handle any complications that may occur, but
can also serve as the result of a failed task. Similarly, if
a player wants to attempt something that is particularly
tough or challenging, or which shouldn’t be too straight-
forward to attempt, consider a cost for that task.
 Threat and Task
Difficulty
While traits can have a lasting impact upon the Difficulty
of tasks, short-term Difficulty changes can often come
about because of Threat spends.
Increasing Difficulty by spending Threat must be com-
pleted before a player decides to buy bonus d20s for
that task: it is unfair to ask a player if they want to buy
any dice before choosing to increase the Difficulty.
320
CHAPTER 9
TRAITS
TRAITS ASSIST YOU WHILE FRAMING A SCENES BY
highlighting circumstances that may affect characters
in some way, shape, or form. Traits are versatile tools,
and a mixture of them is a useful way to establish
situations and environments characters can navigate
or confront.
A trait is a description of something that has been given
mechanical ‘weight’—that description can influence
the game mechanics. Traits always describe things true
about the situation, location, or character, and in turn,
if the thing a trait describes stops being true, the trait
changes or vanishes. Traits aren’t inherently advanta-
geous or problematic, but they have the potential to
be either or both. Traits help define what is possible or
impossible in a situation, and help you determine how
difficult some things are to accomplish.
Traits can:
§ Make an activity easier (-1 Difficulty on a task roll)
§ Make an activity harder (+1 Difficulty on a task roll, or
require a task roll where success would normally be
automatic)
§ Make an activity possible where it wouldn’t be nor-
mally possible
§ Make an activity impossible where it would normally
be possible
In general, +1 and -1 Difficulty are the most common-
ly-used effects of a trait. You can use a trait to justify
various bonuses and penalties as the situation de-
mands; these might be extra damage effects, increased
damage or impact to attacks or resistance, increased
complication range, heightened consequences, and
similar effects. For example, if an enemy has a compli-
cation describing a weakness in its defenses, the trait
may grant an attacker the Piercing damage effect on
their attacks.
Removing a trait that makes a task impossible or creat-
ing a trait that makes the impossible possible are ways
to handle abstract or unusual approaches to prob-
lem-solving mechanically, and they can help you and the
players add extra impact to unfolding events.
 Adjudicating traits
Handling traits in play may seem daunting, especially if
there are several in play. In practice, however, judging
whether (and how) a trait applies can be straightfor-
ward. Each trait can be placed into a simple statement,
such as the examples below, and if that statement
makes sense, it applies. If it doesn’t make sense, it
doesn’t apply.
§ Because I am [character trait], this activity is…
§ Because of [situation or Location trait], this activ-
ity is…
§ Because I have a [equipment trait], this activity is…
The end of each of those statements is one of ‘easier’,
‘harder’, ‘possible’, or ‘impossible’.
Traits are most often created at the start of a scene, and
last for as long as they remain true, which is generally
the end of that scene. If the next scene takes place in
the same location, traits relating to that location may
remain, but ones tied to people, situations, or which
are time-sensitive, may change accordingly. Persistent
character traits follow the character around, though tem-
porary traits (reflecting minor injuries, emotional states,
and similar) may not linger in the same way. Situational
traits seldom last long, vanishing after a few rounds in
combat, or lasting until the end of the scene.
Potent traits are a collection of traits which have been
stacked: this is indicated by a number after the trait’s
name, which is the trait’s Potency. A Dense Smoke 2
trait has twice as much effect on the situation as an or-
dinary trait, perhaps increasing Difficulty by 2, or having
two different effects.
GAMEMASTERING
321
 Other Ways to
Apply Traits
Sometimes a trait may need to have a different impact
to make the scene play out in a way that feels right. As
an option, you could mark a trait as either beneficial or
detrimental:
§ A beneficial trait might be a prompt to reduce the
Momentum cost of an option, or add a special effect
when trying to overcome an extended task. A trait
representing a group of subordinates might allow
a character to perform a task they couldn’t attempt
alone, or even to perform a task where they aren’t
personally present (by giving orders to a team).
§ A detrimental trait might prevent a character from
using a specific option (such as stopping them from
Keeping the Initiative or prevent them from assisting)
or reduce Protection or Resistance.
VALUES AND DIRECTIVES
THE VALUES A PLAYER CHOOSES FOR THEIR CHAR-
acter are choices about who that character is. It’s
your job to put those statements to the test: applying
pressure to a particular belief, relationship, or statement
of personal identity is how those values are highlight-
ed and emphasized in a story, and the true test of a
person’s values is when those values may be difficult to
hold on to.
Are there any values one character has that conflicts
with another character in the group? If so, what could
put those characters at odds with one another?
Consider making a list of all the main characters’ values.
Keep that list with your notes during the session—it’s
a good reference for situations that might crop up or-
ganically in play—but make a point of reviewing the list
before an adventure begins.
§ Are there any values where two characters are es-
pecially close, they work well together, or their bond
is particularly strong? If so, what pressure could this
adventure put upon that connection?
§ Could an adversary or situation test one of the char-
acters’ values? If so, how?
§ Does any character have a value which may come
into conflict with a Directive present in the adventure?
Working through the list to find potential sources of
conflict or tension can help interweave the characters’
stories into the adventure you’re running, consider the
following questions:
Asking those questions can help you be more aware
of the characters’ values during the game itself. Noting
down any answers you find can be a useful way to keep
those potential conflicts in mind. A handful of oppor-
tunities for this kind of dramatic tension is plenty, and
if you don’t find something that plays to everyone’s
values in one adventure, prioritize the ones you missed
next time: if you ran a doctor-centric episode, then
maybe the captain, engineer, or pilot gets the spotlight
next time.
322
CHAPTER 9
: . Sources of Conflict
Creating a specific NPC (or adjusting one already pro-
vided by the adventure) is an easy way to put pressure
on a particular value or connection, as it’s a character
under your direct control. This could be an adversary,
but there’s no reason an allied NPC can’t be a source of
tension for a player character, particularly if they’re an
old friend, old rival, or a family member.
Reusing an NPC from a previous adventure can be espe-
cially fun, particularly if they tie to a longer story thread
for that character: Gul Dukat serves in this role for Major
Kira in Deep Space Nine, and Crewman Daniels does so
in a different way for Captain Archer in Enterprise.
If a specific faction relates well to a value or connection,
then there’s little harm in introducing them to the adven-
ture. If the adventure is pre-written to involve Romulans,
but one of your player characters has a history with
Cardassians, swapping the Romulans out can work,
but so might including some minor details about an
Obsidian Order agent skulking around.
: . Directives
Directives are also a good source of conflict. The point
at which a character’s deeply-held beliefs clash with
their orders is a good source of drama: the realization
that a character’s beliefs prevent them doing as ordered,
or that their values compel them to act in a way that their
orders prohibit, is natural drama fuel.
THREAT
THREAT IS A MECHANIC THAT CAN BE USED TO
raise the stakes of a scene or even a whole adventure. It
allows you to alter and manipulate elements in a scene
without direct action from NPCs, providing and shaping
twists, turns, and challenges for the player characters to
overcome.
You begin each adventure with a set amount of Threat
based on the number of players in the game, as well as
numerous means and opportunities to gain more during
play. Each adventure has numerous opportunities to
spend that Threat to empower NPCs, change the situ-
ation, and create problems for the player characters. In
this way, the Threat pool grows and shrinks as charac-
ters act and react in each scene.
Directives come in two forms:
§ OBJECTIVES: Any Directive which prompts a specific
goal or desired outcome. These instruct the charac-
ters in what they have been sent to accomplish. They
can come into play most often as an extra way to
spend Determination.
§ PROHIBITIONS: Any Directive which restricts the
actions which may be undertaken. These are stand-
ing orders, treaties, and other instructions to avoid
specific actions. The Prime Directive is an example.
These come into play most often as extra ways to
earn Determination: attempting to take an action pro-
hibited by the Directive can either result in a player
suffering a complication or challenging the Directive
(and suffering the consequences later), but either
outcome comes with an extra point of Determination.
Putting one or more Directives into place signals the
shape of the adventure. Each one says, ‘Command
wants you to do this’, or ‘Command does not want this
to happen’. They aren’t hard restrictions, as players
can break them if they wish (most often by challenging
them), and they don’t give specific instructions as to
how to solve a problem. Rather, they impose either a
desired goal or a set of constraints the player charac-
ters must work around, compelling them to be creative
in solving problems.
Threat is a means of building tension—the more Threat,
the greater the likelihood something will endanger or im-
peril the player characters. The player characters don’t
know how much Threat you have, but their instincts may
tell them when something seems too easy, or they may
have a feeling when danger draws near, giving them a
sense of the peril awaiting them.
As the adventure progresses, you may spend a lot of
Threat in one scene, creating a difficult and danger-
ous situation, but also producing a release of tension
afterwards as Threat is now low. Or, you may choose to
allow Threat to build over successive scenes, spending
little or none of it until a climactic event occurs. In this
way, Threat mimics and emulates the rising and falling
tension of dramatic storytelling.
GAMEMASTERING
323
JUSTIN USHER
Threat is best thought of as an abstract representation
of all the things that might go wrong at any given mo-
ment. It’s all the unknown variables, and the unfolding
conspiracies, and the malign influence of powerful foes,
and the clamor of battle, and the chaos that can erupt
when tension runs high.
describe a problem that could occur. By describing this
problem in advance, if you use that problem to gain or
spend Threat, it doesn’t come ‘out of nowhere’, and thus
feels like an organic part of the situation rather than
something arbitrary.
During a scene, Threat is one of two methods by which
you can influence events: the other being the actions
of NPCs. As a result, it is powerful and evocative if
used well, and it is versatile; but, it is also finite, with
the quantity often defined by the actions taking place
in the scene. But, where some ways of gaining and
spending Threat are straightforward and self-explanato-
ry—in any instance where a player character could use
Momentum, an NPC can use Threat, for example—oth-
ers may require more work to use in a satisfying way.
Traits can provide a solid basis for this: if a walkway or
bridge is unstable, then a trait which reflects that can
be ample justification for uses of Threat, and this can
easily be included when establishing the scene. During
a scene, complications, the effects of failed tasks, or
the cost to attempt or succeed at something can all be
used as opportunities to introduce new uses for Threat.
Another way may be for the adversaries to create a trait,
which can serve as foreshadowing.
: . Foreshadowing
It's a good practice to describe ways Threat could be
gained, or effects could be triggered by spending Threat,
in advance of using them. During the action, you may
In addition to making a Threat spend seem natural and
fitting, foreshadowing also gives the players a chance to
prevent or avoid that problem. This may turn into an ex-
tra objective for the player characters to pursue, or they
may decide they have too much to do already and ignore
that potential problem.
324
CHAPTER 9
 Dithering
Sometimes players spend time debating a situation and
don’t spend enough time doing things. This can suit some
groups fine, but other groups may talk in circles and need
a nudge to get them to decide on a course of action.
In these situations, you may choose to announce to the
group their debating will add Threat, and if this doesn’t
stir them to action, add 2 to Threat.
This Threat could be spent right away to change the
situation in such a way that makes the players react and
gets the game moving again.
: . Gaining Threat
YOU BEGIN EVERY ADVENTURE WITH A SET AMOUNT
of Threat, based on both the number of players and on
the underlying tension and danger of the adventure
itself. By default, this is 2 Threat per player, but some
adventures may begin with a larger or smaller number:
THREAT FROM THE PLAYER CHARACTERS
A significant source of Threat is the player characters,
who can add to Threat in the following ways.
IMMEDIATE MOMENTUM: Whenever a player charac-
ter uses a Momentum spend listed as Immediate, they
may choose to pay some or all the cost by adding Threat
instead of spending Momentum. Immediate Momentum
spends are listed on page 260.
COMPLICATIONS: Whenever a player character suf-
fers one or more complications on a task, they or the
gamemaster may choose to add 2 Threat to ‘buy off’ the
complication.
A bit of random chance means there’ll often be a trickle
of Threat coming from the players over the course of an
adventure. You can adjust this by altering the complica-
tion range of different tasks (where appropriate).
ESCALATION: You, or the rules, may note specific
actions or decisions risk escalation, making a situation
more dangerous or unpredictable. If a character per-
forms an action that risks escalation, they immediately
add 1 Threat.
Instances of escalation should be appropriate to the
theme and style of the game. However, use of lethal
force, or carrying powerful or unusual weapons into a
populated area, are both actions that commonly risk
escalation. You should declare when an action risks
escalation, and then allow the player character to
choose whether they wish to continue with that choice:
springing an escalation cost on a player after the fact
is unfair.
OTHER SOURCES OF THREAT
You have a two other ways of generating Threat, which
give additional control over how much Threat is available
and how that reflects game events.
THREATENING CIRCUMSTANCES: The environment
or situation of a new scene may be threatening or
dangerous in some way, adding 1 or 2 Threat when the
scene begins. Some NPCs may generate Threat simply
by turning up (this is covered by the Menacing special
ability), in response to changes in the situation (often
noted in the NPC’s special abilities or talents), or by
taking certain actions. Sometimes, the environment may
have specific ways of increasing Threat when characters
interact with it: an alarm that can be triggered, heavy or
dangerous machinery that can be activated, or flamma-
ble materials that could burn or explode.
This method is easy to abuse, but it can be fun for the
players if used carefully and thematically. Actions and
situations that generate Threat are more interesting in
play than effects that generate Threat automatically, as
they help reinforce a sense of cause-and-effect as well
as being something the players can try to interrupt or
prevent. Allies with the Menacing ability are an interest-
ing idea too: it’s a nice compromise for having a pow-
erful ally, as their presence draws attention that helps
offset their abilities.
ADVERSARY MOMENTUM: Adversary NPCs with
unspent Momentum may spend that Momentum to add
to Threat, as they lack a group Momentum pool. Each
Momentum spent adds 1 Threat.
This is an important option, as it can allow the play-
ers’ enemies to build up Threat through their normal
actions. A useful trick is to have minions who generate
Momentum on their tasks which then gets used by their
leader, or to use smaller battles with enemies who dump
all their Momentum into Threat rather than spend it on
themselves, creating a fight that was ‘suspiciously easy’
to build up to a later scene.
GAMEMASTERING
325
: . Spending Threat
Your options for using Threat are more diverse and
numerous than the ways of generating Threat, and this
is deliberate: there are always more things you could use
Threat on than there is Threat to spend.
ADVERSARY MOMENTUM: Threat serves in part as a
mirror of the players’ Momentum pool. Adversary NPCs
may spend Threat in all the ways player characters can
spend Momentum. It is entirely possible to run an adven-
ture and only use Threat for this purpose, ignoring all
the narrative elements of Threat to use it simply as ‘evil
Momentum’.
ADVERSARY THREAT COSTS: On any action where a
player character would be required to add Threat, an
NPC performing the same action or making the same
choice must spend an equivalent amount of Threat.
ADVERSARY COMPLICATIONS: If an NPC suffers a
complication, you may buy off that complication by
spending 2 Threat.
COMPLICATION: You may create a complication by
spending 2 Threat. This must come naturally from the
current situation. This can be a useful way to generate
complications without waiting for them to occur by
chance. Ideal opportunities for this option include failed
tasks or from NPC actions (akin to spending Momentum
to generate a trait), but as a rule of thumb, a complica-
tion should occur only because something happened,
rather than appearing out of nowhere.
REINFORCEMENTS: You may bring in additional adver-
sary NPCs during a scene. Minor NPCs cost 1 Threat
each, while Notable NPCs cost 2 Threat. A starship can
be brought in (appearing on long-range sensors, drop-
ping out of warp, or decloaking) by spending Threat
equal to the ship’s Scale. In a conflict, this should hap-
pen at the start of a round, with the reinforcements able
to act during that round. This does not apply to NPCs
who are present at the start of the scene, only additional
ones who arrive while the scene is in progress.
This is a powerful tool, in part because it allows you to
scale a conflict according to the player characters’ abil-
ities and actions on the fly. Justifications for reinforce-
ments are easy to devise—enemies sounding the alarm
or spending an action calling for help—and it can be
used to refocus an action scene on its objectives rather
than simply trying to defeat all the enemies.
326
CHAPTER 9
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS AND
NARRATIVE CHANGES
The options you have for using Threat are not limited to
primarily mechanical options discussed earlier. Many
of the most potent and dramatic options have a more
far-reaching effect than buying extra d20s or altering
task Difficulty.
Dramatic scenes often play out in exciting environments,
whether crumbling stairs in ancient ruins, the bustling
indifference of a busy city, a rocky cliff with waves
thundering against the jagged shore, the offices of an
orbiting refinery, or even more evocative locations. When
describing scenes, you will have already defined what
the environment is like, and they should typically aim to
have the environment enhance the scene: a scene with
an evocative backdrop will be much more memorable
and interesting.
Furthermore, you can use Threat to push the environ-
ment into motion in some fashion, or by taking obvious
elements from the traits and other description, and
emphasizing or developing them. You can employ Threat
to perform a few different narrative tricks and techniques
that can add twists, turns, and other story elements to
the game.
Environmental and narrative effects of this sort come in
a few distinct categories.
§ Incidental effects cost 1 Threat, and they appear
in play as things such as flickering lights, unstable
floors, and thick smoke. These don’t cause a signifi-
cant problem, but it might increase the complication
range of a tasks by 1, make some routine action re-
quire a Difficulty 1 task when success would normally
be automatic, or require a Difficulty 1 task to avoid
a problem. The effect applies to a single character
when the Threat is spent; extra Threat may be spent
to affect additional characters, though it shouldn’t
affect too many characters at once.
§ A change of circumstances is more significant,
and such an effect should cost at least 2 Threat. An
environmental effect like this can be represented by
taking an existing location or situation trait, and then
replacing it with another trait of the same type (such
as going from bright light to Deep Darkness), or by
adding a new trait that alters the situation in some
way, shape, or form. Each trait changed, added,
or removed costs 2 Threat, and some changes of
circumstances could see several traits change in
quick succession.
JUSTIN USHER
§ Immediate hazards inflict Stress suddenly on a single
character. This can come from factors like fire, collaps-
ing structures, falling, dangerous chemicals, strange
energies, traps, and other perils. The number of points
of Threat spent determines how much damage is
inflicted, as well as if any damage effects apply. The
amount of damage and the damage effects chosen
should make sense for the environmental hazard
represented: an explosion could have the Area effect,
while dangerous radiation might have the Persistent
effect. An immediate hazard applies its effects instant-
ly, but characters or ships affected may attempt a task
to resist or avoid the effects, and the easier the hazard
is to avoid, the less Threat it costs (to a minimum of 1).
§ Lingering hazards are effects applied to an area
(one zone), which inflict Injury (personal combat) or
damage (starship combat) upon anyone within that
area, at the start of each round they remain in that
area. This may represent something like a raging fire,
choking fumes, or deadly radiation. You should spend
Threat to create this effect when the player characters
first become aware of it, though it should still come
naturally from the scene description and associated
traits. Remember that, while it affects a whole area
and potentially multiple characters, cunning players
may figure out ways to use it against their enemies.
§ Dividing the group can complicate the player charac-
ters’ plans. Perhaps a door slams shut behind part of
the group, some of them are beamed away (or left be-
hind), or a section of floor collapses beneath them, or
a means of climbing like a ladder or staircase breaks.
Whatever happens, some circumstance has contrived
to separate the group temporarily. When used, you
split the group into two, choosing how many and
which characters end up in which part of the group.
Then spend Threat equal to the number of player
characters in the larger of the two parts of the group.
The two parts of the group cannot directly interact
with one another while divided—though they may still
be able to communicate by shouting or using their
communicators—and reuniting the group requires
some time and effort.
GAMEMASTERING
327
§ A reveal shows the player characters some fact that
they wish wasn’t true. This could be an ally betraying
them, or it could be the discovery that the situation
they’re in is an ambush, or that there’s a bomb in the
room. This sets up a new situation, changing the na-
ture of the scene: perhaps a social conflict or stealthy
approach becomes combat, or perhaps there’s now a
challenge to overcome, or time pressure that applies.
A reveal costs 4 Threat.
§ A reversal is a significant turning point or change of
fortunes, and you may only use this once per adven-
ture. By spending 2 Threat per player character
present in the scene, you end the scene immediate-
ly, with the situation unresolved. Describe how the
situation escalates or deteriorates in a major way—
such as an overwhelming number of enemy reinforce-
ments or some other imminent catastrophe—and
then end the scene. The reversal cannot be used
to harm or kill the player characters directly, only to
radically change their circumstances, and the players
should be given a few moments to discuss their new
situation before you set a new scene.
 Environmental
Actions
It may sometimes be useful to set aside a turn every
round for the environment to take actions.
The environment isn’t doing anything deliberately, but
this provides a convenient point at which you can handle
those moments where the scene itself adds to or spends
Threat for environmental or narrative effects.
EXAMPLE: The action takes place inside a burning
building. Each round, the situation adds 2 to Threat,
as the state of the building worsens and the fire
rages, and the gamemaster can spend Threat to
make the fire spread, to cause parts of the ceiling or
floor to collapse, to make choking smoke billow out,
and so forth. Gaining that Threat and spending it
on those effects takes place on a specific turn each
round, within the normal action order—so that the
situation will get worse.
: . Hazard Severity (Personal)
EFFECT THREAT COST NOTES
Injury with severity 1 2 Base severity for a hazard
+1 severity +2 Can be stacked multiple times
Affects all characters in one zone Multiply total
cost by 2
Apply cost modifier from area last. May only apply to
Immediate Hazards.
Applies to more than one zone +3 May only be used with Lingering Hazards.
Does not affect adversaries +3 May only be used with the Area damage effect or
Lingering Hazards.
: . Hazard Damage (Starships)
EFFECT THREAT COST NOTES
3 damage 2 Base damage for a hazard
+1 damage +1 Can be stacked multiple times
Area Multiply total
cost by 2
Apply cost modifier from area last. May only apply to
Immediate Hazards.
Persistent +3
Piercing +2
Applies to more than one zone +3 May only be used with Lingering Hazards.
Does not affect adversaries +3 May only be used with the Area damage effect or
Lingering Hazards.
328
CHAPTER 9
: . CHAPTER 9.2
EXTENDED TASKS
AND CHALLENGES
“Somehow we have to generate enough energy
to get out of here, but we’ve got a booby trap
that eats energy for breakfast. How do we fool it,
block it, shut it down, anything?
- Lt. Commander Geordi La Forge
EXTENDED TASKS
EXTENDED TASKS (DETAILED IN
chapter 7.2 on page 271) function by
applying the game’s Stress and injury
mechanics to non-combat actions. That
is, an extended task is an activity where
‘beating’ the activity means success-
fully inflicting damage or Stress to it
several times.
An extended task is a pacing tool, de-
signed to slow down and add uncertain-
ty to an activity. They represent activities
which take longer than a single task,
and create an opportunity for action. If
you apply an extended task in the wrong
place, your players are likely to see it as
just meaningless dice rolling, and they’ll
likely get bored.
If there is no pressure or peril involved
in an extended task, then it would be
better as a single task that simply takes
a long time to complete, or even just
describing how long it takes and moving
on. If there are no consequences for
failure or for taking too long, don’t use
an extended task.
§ If characters are trying to achieve
something complex in a specific
amount of time, an extended task is
appropriate, so long as the conse-
quences of failure are significant.
Defusing a bomb before the timer
reaches zero is a classic tense
situation, and one well-suited to an
extended task.
§ If characters are attempting a delicate
activity where failure is risky or costly,
extended tasks can work well.
§ If characters are attempting some-
thing complex in a dangerous envi-
ronment, where merely being in the
environment means suffering Stress
or risking death, this can make a good
extended task.
§ If characters are attempting to
perform some complex scientific or
technical activity during a combat
situation, this is an ideal extended
task, and one that can be used
to give characters less skilled at
fighting something important to do
during a fight.
These situations all create the neces-
sary second component of an extend-
ed task: tension. Because the players
cannot know for certain how long the
extended task will take, pairing this
uncertainty with risk creates tension,
which in turn makes each roll meaning-
ful. If each roll means taking damage,
then taking too long and needing to
make too many rolls could be deadly.
COMMODORE
NELLA XEN
While many of the more
complex problems
you’ll challenge player
characters with can
be as varied as the
number of planets in
the Galaxy, they are
usually best presented
in the game as either
extended tasks or
challenges. This
section delves into
more detail on using
these options in
your game.
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
GAMEMASTERING
329
PAOLO PUGGIONI
Because an extended task represents the results of
several tasks strung together, the overall consequences
for failure can be much greater and much more signif-
icant than might be the case for a single task. Never
spring these consequences on a player unexpectedly:
a character (and player) should go into an extended
task understanding the risks involved, because it’s
even more dramatic if the character knowingly risks or
sacrifices their life.
: . Breakthrough Effects
When the characters achieve a breakthrough on an
extended task, it should trigger some effect which alters
the scene in some way. The gamemaster determines the
benefit, but the most common include:
§ DIFFICULTY: The extended task’s Difficulty is in-
creased or reduced by 1.
§ HINDRANCE: The extended task’s Resistance is
increased or reduced by 1, to a minimum of 0.
§ PROGRESS: The next roll made against the problem
gains +2 Impact.
§ EFFECT ON THE SCENE: The problem reduces the
Difficulty of tasks elsewhere in the scene, or increas-
es the Difficulty of an enemy’s tasks.
§ CREATE A TRAIT: A trait is created, or one is re-
moved or changed. A trait created or altered by an
extended task should be more persistent and more
330
CHAPTER 9
 Social Extended
Tasks
In a social conflict, extended tasks can be useful for
representing conflict over large matters, such as trade
negotiations or peace talks. While these don’t necessari-
ly have the same urgency or peril associated with defus-
ing a bomb or preventing a warp core breach, the same
principles of consequences and risk can still apply.
A useful trick is to enforce the idea that once you’ve
failed a social task to persuade someone, you cannot
attempt it again until you’ve altered the context in some
way. In an extended task, failing a task means that side
cannot make any further attempts without doing some-
thing different. It may mean the characters need a better
offer while negotiating, or to prove they’re willing to carry
out a threat they made, or something to support the lies
they’ve told.
difficult to affect than one created by an ordinary task
or by Momentum—the extra work involved in the
extended task justifies a larger effect.
§ EVENT: The problem is tied to specific occurrences
in the scene, with each breakthrough altering the
state of the scene. Perhaps enemies grow more
numerous, desperate, or dangerous with each break-
through until the problem is overcome.
EXTENDED CONSEQUENCES
JUST AS AN EXTENDED TASK REPRESENTS A PROB-
lem that needs to be overcome, you can use a modified
form of those rules to represent a growing problem that
needs to be avoided. A consequence is structured in
the same way as an extended task, with a couple of
minor adjustments:
§ A consequence has a Trouble track instead of a
Progress track. This shows how far a situation can be
pushed before something bad happens.
§ A consequence may have Resistance, which rep-
resents stabilizing factors that can limit how much
impact the characters have. Each point of Resistance
reduces Impact by 1.
§ A consequence has Setbacks instead of
Breakthroughs.
§ Consequences do not have a basic Difficulty. This
is because you don’t make tasks to affect a conse-
quence, as discussed below.
§ Consequences have an Impact rating. 3 or 4, but may
vary based on circumstances.
Whenever you create a scene with a consequence, de-
fine one or more conditions to cause the consequence
to worsen: then, apply the Impact rating, marking that
many spaces off the Trouble track. The most common of
these conditions are likely to be complications on specif-
ic tasks, failing certain tasks, taking specific dangerous
actions, or certain NPC actions.
: . Setbacks
Each setback may have a different result depending on
what the consequence represents, and a single con-
sequence may have different results for each setback.
These results may be one of the following:
§ UNCERTAINTY: Some tasks associated with the
consequence increase their complication range by 1
(i.e., from 20, to 19–20).
§ DIFFICULTY: Some tasks associated with the con-
sequence become more difficult, adding 1 to their
Difficulty.
§ INSTABILITY: The consequence grows more precar-
ious. This may reduce the consequence’s Resistance
(if any) by 2 or add 2 to the Trouble rating.
§ ESCALATION: The setback adds 2 Threat, to be used
immediately or saved for some later problem.
§ CREATE TRAIT: The setback creates a trait which
hinders the player characters or helps the enemy.
§ EVENT: The setback triggers some activity or
change in the scene, such as the arrival or departure
of specific individuals, a change in enemy tactics, or
a new danger, or even inflicting Stress on one of the
player characters.
EXAMPLE: The away team is attempting to infiltrate a
Romulan research base, and the gamemaster creates
a consequence to represent the guards' alertness,
and thus the things which make the consequence
worsen are failed tasks to move unnoticed, complica-
tions on any task, or any noisy or attention-grabbing
action. The basic Impact rating is 4, the consequence
has a Trouble track of 15, with setbacks on the eighth
and twelfth spaces. The Romulans aren’t expecting
intruders, so there’s 2 Resistance because of their
relaxed posture. The gamemaster decides the first
setback makes the Romulans suspicious, removing
the Resistance, while the second setback adds 1
to the Difficulty of any further tasks to move around
unseen. Once the track is filled, the alarm is sounded
and the Romulans become aware of the intruders.
: . Consequences and
Threat
While player characters cannot apply Momentum to
a consequence—consequences occur outside of the
characters’ control—you may use Threat to affect a con-
sequence: for each Threat spent (maximum 3), increase
the consequence’s Impact by 1.
: . Using Consequences
Consequences can make for an especially tense scene
in a variety of situations, though they should be used
sparingly, for situations which are life-and-death, or
where the cost of failure is severe.
§ Attempting to remain unnoticed in a hostile environ-
ment is a natural fit for a consequence. Actions (and
failed tasks) which draw attention naturally feed into
the consequence.
§ Moving through unstable or dangerous terrain, can
serve as an interesting consequence. complications
GAMEMASTERING
331
when moving around may disturb the terrain and
cause it to collapse further, making progress more
difficult or even inflicting Stress.
§ Social situations against hostile or easily-provoked
foes may face a consequence. Complications or
failed tasks may anger or insult them, potentially
leading to violence.
§ Working on dangerous or restricted technology can
serve as an extended consequence, with setbacks
representing security protocols and anti-tamper
countermeasures being triggered.
CHALLENGES
AN OVERARCHING GOAL OR COMPLEX SITUATION
may call for you to present a challenge. Challenges are
a series of tasks, or even extended tasks, arranged in
such a way as the outcome of one influences or allows
for another task. A basic challenge should have its key
tasks described to the players, these tasks being the
ones the player characters need to complete before the
overall challenge has been overcome. These key tasks
can be attempted and completed independently of each
other; however, there are a variety of interesting ways to
structure challenges, detailed as follows.
: . Linear Challenges
Tasks in a linear challenge happen one after the other
in a series. The first task must be completed before the
second can be attempted, and so on. This is a way of
structuring the challenge to give clarity to the players on
what they need to do. While it can be a little limiting to
player creativity, sometimes situations call for a specific
course of action.
: . Gated Challenges
In a gated challenge, the key tasks can only be attempt-
ed once specific tasks in the challenge have been
completed. This provides the players with some flexibili-
ty, allowing them to approach the challenge from several
angles, or choose from branching options. When build-
ing gated challenges, note your final task or objective in
the middle or at the end of your structure, then place the
other key tasks around it, indicating what tasks must be
completed before the players can move onto the others.
332
CHAPTER 9
These situations can even be combined with an extend-
ed task. Extended tasks and consequences can work
well together on a single activity with high rewards but
considerable risks: each time a character attempts a
task towards the extended task, a successful task is
rewarded with progress, but failed tasks add to the con-
sequence instead.
EXAMPLE: Abducted by a Klingon scientist, Doctor
Phlox is attempting to cure the virus afflicting the
Klingons of the Qu’Vat colony. He’s managed to nar-
row down his work to four different antiviral strains,
but it’ll take a week to test them all. However, the
Klingon High Council plans to wipe out the colony to
stop the spread of the virus in a matter of days. The
only way to determine the cure fast enough is to test
each strain on a different patient. This is a challenge,
with five key tasks: four tasks that cover testing each
of the antiviral strains, and one task to replicate a
cure. The task to replicate a cure can only be at-
tempted once the correct strain has been identified,
meaning that all four antivirus testing tasks need to
be completed first.
: . Non-Key Tasks
Players may want to spend time preparing for a key task,
attempting tasks that don’t contribute to the key task but
instead prepare for it in some way. Use your best judg-
ment to frame the task and its Difficulty. If successful,
completing a non-key task could create a helpful trait or
remove a hindering one.
EXAMPLE: Phlox has identified the cure for the
Qu’Vat colony virus, but the Klingons are impatient
and unwilling to wait for a cure. With Captain Archer
having turned up to rescue him, Phlox sees an oppor-
tunity to speed up creating the cure: a Human host to
replicate antibodies faster. Archer accepts the conse-
quences, and Phlox attempts a new task, injecting his
captain with the virus. The task succeeds and creates
he trait Virus Antibodies, which makes the Replicate
the Cure task easier.
: . Timed Challenges
Combining the pressure of time, or a deadline, to any
of the above structures can add tension to the scenes
in which the challenge takes place, and you should
always have consequences in mind if time runs out.
You should have a clear idea of how many intervals the
challenge takes, normally around 2-3 times the number
of key tasks, and you should have a good idea of how
long that Interval is: half hour, an hour, a day? Once
that’s framed, keep a track of how long task attempts
have taken and how long the player characters have
left—and if they aren’t aware of that you can build
tension by telling them!
Task attempts always take 2 intervals of time, to al-
low players to reduce that to 1 interval by spending
Momentum (though it can also increase due to compli-
cations). Also bear in mind that if players wish to prepare
for tasks, that will take time, too: don’t be afraid to tick off
some intervals in the process. Ultimately, a combination
of time and the structures above can bring some variety
to the game and add in some tension or climax once the
final key tasks are being attempted.
AUREA FRENIERE
EXAMPLE: The U.S.S. Defiant is laying a minefield
at the mouth of the Bajoran wormhole to prevent
Dominion reinforcements coming through. These
cloaked, self-replicating mines cannot be activated
until the entire minefield is set, and it has taken days
to deploy most of the minefield so far. There’s about
an hour’s work left, but a Dominion fleet will enter
weapons range in twenty minutes. The gamemaster
decides the last of this work is an extended task,
but also that it’s timed. Each interval is 2 minutes,
and the Dominion will arrive after ten intervals. Each
overcome task will take two intervals to attempt. The
Defiant can reduce this to one interval by spending
Momentum on successful tasks, but complications
might add intervals to a task.
GAMEMASTERING
333
334
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 10
INTRODUCTORY
ADVENTURE
10.1 The Gorgon's Gaze'' 336
TOBIAS RICHTER
335
: . CHAPTER 10.1
"THE GORGON'S GAZE"
“We travel light-years in hours. And somewhere out
there is a planet that has the discovery I need.
- Doctor Joseph M’Benga
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
COMMODORE
NELLA XEN
Once your group
has created their
characters, consider
using this short
adventure to get a taste
for the game and for the
Star Trek universe. This
short adventure was
designed to introduce
you to the core game
rules as you play, and
can be used as an
introductory adventure
or a standalone
experience.
TO PLAY THIS SHORT ADVENTURE,
you’ll need at least two d20s, though
having a handful for each player might
be helpful. You’ll also want counters to
keep track of Threat and Momentum.
The adventure text is addressed to the
gamemaster, who should familiarize
themselves with the material ahead of
time. Players should not read the sce-
nario, to avoid spoilers.
: . SYNOPSIS
This adventure takes place in the years
following the Federation-Klingon War of
2256–2257, with Starfleet renewing their
exploratory and scientific endeavors
following a period of reconstruction.
The player characters have been
dispatched to the Class-M world of
Gamma Scorpii V to retrieve Dr. Liu
Yen-Chang, the lead scientist of a
research team embedded there to
perform genetic research on the native
population in preparation for an upcom-
ing Starfleet anthropological survey.
Starfleet has yet to hear from him for
over a week since he was scheduled to
request transport off-world.
When the player characters encounter
Liu, he refuses to leave... as the native
population has contracted a deadly
disease he is convinced his team’s
presence caused. Liu insists on verifying
or refuting his team’s culpability and
developing a treatment if they were even
inadvertently responsible. The player
characters are compelled to intervene
out of a duty of care to the planet’s peo-
ple and to ensure all measures of aid are
adherent to General Order One.
: . Spotlight Roles
Though a medical mystery is a major el-
ement of this adventure, this adventure
offers opportunities for other characters
to shine.
While combat is not a focus of this
adventure, there is an optional combat
scene in Act 2 you may add as desired.
DIRECTIVES
IN ADDITION TO THE PRIME
Directive, the Directives (page 323) for
this mission are:
§ Determine why contact was lost.
§ If Dr. Liu is unharmed, assist with his
lab’s dismantling and transport him
home.
§ If Dr. Liu has fallen to harm, render
necessary assistance.
Begin this mission with 2 points of
Threat for each player character in
the group.
336
CHAPTER 10
PRELUDE
BEGIN WITH THE PLAYER CHARACTERS ON DOWN-
time between duty shifts, allowing the players opportu-
nities to let their characters get acquainted. As the time
comes to either return to duty or get some sleep, they
are summoned to the ship’s briefing room. If any ask the
reason, they are informed Starfleet has a new mission
for them.
Morozova continues:
Upon reporting as ordered, a live transmission from
Vice Admiral Katarzyna Morozova, which may be read
or paraphrased to the players, appears on the main
viewscreen:
The Stanford Morehouse Epigenetic Project
embedded a team on the planet to conduct
inobtrusive genetic sampling of the planet’s
population, as Starfleet is prepping an anthropo-
logical survey. The natives, who call themselves
the Voiced, aren’t developmentally ready for first
contact, but we’ve engaged the Gorn twice in the
sector and we want to know as much as possible
about the Voiced should hostilities encroach
upon their world.
Good evening, everyone, I apologize if I derailed
you from retiring for the evening, but a potentially
serious situation has arisen on Gamma Scorpii
V. And by ‘potentially serious,’ I mean potential
cultural contamination of a pre-warp civilization.
Alongside the admiral’s image appears an image of
Gamma Scorpii V and its pertinent details and a photo
of Dr. Liu Yen-Chang, a late-40s Human male of East
Asian descent with short and greying black hair.
Most of the team have already left. The survey
lead, Dr. Liu Yen-Chang, stayed behind to prep
their lab for breakdown but his scheduled call
for transport off-world is overdue by a week. The
radio silence is troubling, both for the doctor’s
sake and the potential of a General Order One
violation. You’re to proceed to Gamma Scorpii V
to perform a welfare check and, if all’s well, bring
Dr. Liu home. Keep me apprised. Morozova out.
ACT I: UNDOING WHAT I HAVE DONE
INVITE THE COMMANDING OFFICER PLAYER TO
read the following log entry. If no one chose to play the
commanding officer, read it to the group.
Stardate 2009.6. We’re minutes away from
Gamma Scorpii V and have spent the travel
time familiarizing ourselves with the Voiced and
their culture, which appears largely agrarian
and community-minded while operating along a
sort of caste system. While I hope direct interac-
tion—even observing General Order One—can
be avoided and loss of contact with Dr. Liu can
be handily explained, I consider it paramount to
conduct this mission prepared for anything.
: . Scene 1: Preparations
Upon arrival near Gamma Scorpii V, the crew may
attempt to contact Liu’s lab, but receive no response. If
the ship’s communications officer is a player character,
they may attempt an Insight + Engineering task assist-
ed by the ship’s Communications + Engineering at a
Difficulty of 1 to determine the lab’s communications
transceiver is not pinging back and is likely inoperative.
This task doubles as an opportunity for the player char-
acters to earn some early Momentum.
Face-to-face contact has thus become the only means
of contacting Liu. As the lab is a kilometer or more from
any residence or settlement and the Voiced travel solely
by walking, disguises are immediately unnecessary, but
landing party members may opt to wear native attire
as a precaution. If the ship’s medical officer is capable
of Stanford Morehouse’s cosmetic genome-editing
process (or able to research it via a Reason + Medicine
task assisted by the ship’s Computers + Medicine
at a Difficulty of 1), they may alter the landing party’s
INTRODuCTORY ADVENTuRE
337
appearances to match those of the Voiced using
Stanford Morehouse’s genetic samples.
walk, Liu happened upon a Voiced couple, one of whom
was in severe pain, his forearm and hand appearing as
immobile, chalk-white stone. When Liu offered help, the
afflicted Voiced’s partner warned him away, saying that
others in their village had fallen similarly ill.
Once preparations are made, the landing party may
transport to the surface by transporter or shuttlecraft.
Standard issue equipment is permitted but is to be kept
out of sight if contact with the Voiced is expected.
: . Scene 2: Contamination
The landing party arrives outside the lab, itself a con-
verted cargo module camouflaged with foliage. Liu
then emerges, dismissing any attempt at pleasantries,
and tells the player characters he intends to remain on
Gamma Scorpii V. Something is killing the Voiced, he
explains, and he may be responsible.
Liu postulated their genetic sampling efforts could have
somehow created this disease. He has since been re-
viewing his team’s work product and equipment to prove
or disprove their role in the epidemic and develop a cure.
If the player characters posit that General Order One
prohibits interference, Liu will snap back that his team
have already interfered in the worst way imaginable and
finding a cure is his only means of setting things right.
Liu invites the landing party inside and explains he stayed
behind to monitor his last remaining genome analyses
and prepare the lab for teardown. As his analyses would
take time, Liu genetically disguised himself and took one
last walk through the surrounding forest. During that
The player characters are now duty-bound to at least
observe Liu’s endeavors if not outright assist while still
bound by their mission directives. Liu agrees to leave
with them if his team is absolved but asserts he intends
to stay if it was and work on a cure.
EREN ARIK
338
CHAPTER 10
 The Voiced
The Voiced, so named to distinguish themselves from
the planet’s fauna, are a race of humanoids largely in-
distinguishable from Humans save for their ears, which
appear as partial domes on the sides of their heads,
each with a pair of visible auditory canals. They wear
clothing made from animal hides and furs and are at a
pre-industrial developmental level.
The Voiced place a high value on working towards the
betterment of the communities in which they live. Voiced
culture is arranged in a system of occupational castes
called “tiers”:
§ The Tier of Creation (artisans, builders, chefs)
§ The Tier of Procurement (hunters, gatherers)
§ The Tier of Safety (healers, police, military)
§ The Tier of Sagacity (lawmakers, scholars)
§ The Tier of Service (merchants, hospitality, sanitation)
You may adjust the attribute or department scores to
reflect members of different tiers. Bows and knives are
more likely to be carried by those in the Tiers of Safety
or Procurement.
Dr. Liu Yen-Chang
Notable NPC
VALUE: I must atone for what I have inflicted upon the
Voiced
FOCUSES: Genetics, Xenobiology
TRAITS: Human, Geneticist
PERSONAL THREAT: 3 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 10
FITNESS 07
PRESENCE 08
DARING 09
INSIGHT 09
REASON 11
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 02
CONN 01
SECURITY
--
SCIENCE 03
Typical Voiced
Minor NPC
TRAITS: Voiced, their tier
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 09
FITNESS 08
PRESENCE 08
DARING 08
INSIGHT 09
REASON 09
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE 01
CONN
–
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE
–
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Knife: Melee, Deadly 2, Size 1H, Hidden 1
§ Bow: Ranged, Deadly 3, Size 2H
Talents
§ AGRARIAN: The Voiced are well-suited to undevel-
oped environments. The Difficulty of any task attempt-
ed in wilderness environments is reduced by 1, to a
minimum of 0.
§ COMMUNITY MINDED: Any task attempted to aid
another Voiced may re-roll one d20.
Attack
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
Talents
§ APPLIED RESEARCH: Once per scene, when Liu at-
tempts a task which relates to information he received
earlier that scene from an Obtain Information spend,
the first bonus die he purchases is free.
§ INDEFATIGUABLE: When Liu fails a task, and
attempts that task again during the same scene, he
reduces the Difficulty of the second attempt (and any
subsequent attempts if he still fails) by 1.
INTRODuCTORY ADVENTuRE
339
: . Optional Scene:
Permission or
Forgiveness?
The player characters may report Liu’s plight to Vice
Admiral Morozova, who immediately cites General Order
One but is willing to hear the player characters out. The
player characters may simply roleplay this interaction
or resolve it with a social conflict task with the player
character addressing Morozova rolling their Daring +
Command against Morozova’s Control + Command
(you can use the statistics for Rear-Admiral Thy’ran on
page 354 for Morozova) at Difficulty 1.
If Morozova affirms they fulfill their original Directives,
the player characters may either follow orders and
extract Liu, much to his vocal displeasure, or defy orders,
assist Liu, and deal with the consequences afterward.
Should Morozova allow the player characters to assist
Liu, she imposes additional mission Directives:
§ Help Dr. Liu determine if his team’s work caused the
disease affecting the Voiced.
§ If Liu and his team are blameless, proceed with previ-
ous mission directives.
§ If Liu’s team did cause the disease, assist Liu in re-
searching a treatment or cure for the disease that can
be administered without violating General Order One.
ACT 2: FACES AMONG THE CROWD
Our mission to check in on Dr. Liu has become
a mission of mercy. Our medical and science
departments have been tasked with an all-hands
effort in understanding the cause of the disease
and a potential treatment for it.
: . Scene 2: Let’s Meet the
Neighbors
Upon arriving at the village, the player characters find
a variety of grass-roofed wooden homes or places of
trade, such as a general store, an inn, and shops for
various craftspeople. The mood here is subdued, but the
villagers nevertheless go about their business. Notably,
however, all of them seem to be avoiding the inn.
: . Scene 1: What Do
We Know?
Liu admits his only first-hand experience of the epidem-
ic came from the couple he encountered in the forest,
who he presumes live in a village a few kilometers from
the lab. The player characters may visit this village in
disguise, but Liu refuses to accompany them for fear his
presence could worsen the situation. If the player char-
acters’ medical officer did not genetically disguise them
to resemble the Voiced for whatever reason, Liu agrees
to do so, but insists on first performing medical scans
on those intending to travel to the village. If any of the
landing party refuses or any of them shows any sign of
illness, Liu will plead with them to stay behind; whether
they assent is that player’s choice.
If the player characters enter any place of business other
than the inn or speak to any of the locals, the locals will
appear initially hesitant to interact and ask if they have
“the chalk.” If the player characters ask what the chalk
is, the villagers describe the calcification disease and
volunteer that dozens of villagers have contracted it and
their healers cannot treat it. The afflicted were taken to a
converted barn near the village, but ran out of room and
had to resort to quarantining the afflicted, including the inn.
If the player characters go to the inn, they find it emp-
ty save for the innkeepers, a couple named Shev and
Elaani. This is the same couple Liu discovered in the for-
est, a fact they may surmise by Shev’s calcified forearm.
If the inn was the player characters’ first point of contact
upon arrival in the village, Shev and Elaani provide all of
the information stated above if asked.
At this point, the player characters may work towards
one of two objectives, or split up to work towards both
simultaneously—either travel to the nearby village (as
detailed in Scene 2) or help Liu research the disease’s
cause (detailed in Scene 3), the latter of which they may
do either in Liu’s lab or aboard their ship. Whoever goes
to the village will have to dress in native attire in tandem
with their genetic disguises.
If asked, Shev claims to be otherwise fine but his arm
is entirely numb and immobile. He and Elaani were
leaving in hopes of escaping infection only for him to
exhibit symptoms along the way. Business has vanished
since Shev became ill, as he was forced to quarantine.
He and Elaani also mention some of the afflicted have
340
CHAPTER 10
experienced bullying by those who believe the chalk is a
form of divine punishment for failing the community.
The conversation ends when Shev suddenly feels pain
in his arm; the player characters note the calcification
has spread a couple centimeters further up his arm.
The player characters have one of two opportunities to
obtain information on the chalk, either by surreptitiously
scanning Shev, or noticing (with a successful Reason
+ Security task at Difficulty 2) that Shev’s arm has shed
particulate dust from which they might collect a sample.
After any or all of the above interactions take place, the
player characters hear a commotion in the village. If they
respond, they see an entirely calcified Voice—frozen in an
apparent spasm—being stretchered out of their home.
To the horror of those present, the body crumbles to dust!
: . Optional Scene:
Someone Your Own Size
If you wish to acquaint the players with the game’s con-
flict rules or simply add some action to the proceedings,
insert this scene at any time in the village.
The player characters find a group of Voiced menacing a
chalk-stricken youngster. The player characters may ei-
ther warn the group off or engage them in combat if they
refuse to back off. The number of player characters present
equals that of their adversaries, all of which use the Voiced
statistics on page 339. None of them are armed.
No matter how the conflict is resolved, the village con-
stable arrives upon its conclusion and thanks the player
characters for their intervention as the stricken young-
ster is their own child. If the player characters come up
short in combat, the constable warns their adversaries
off with their bow before extending the same thanks as
well as medical aid.
: . Scene 3: Retracing
Steps
The player characters assisting Liu may begin by contact
tracing the crews of the two Federation vessels that visit-
ed them during their embedment, the civilian science
vessel Lederberg and the U.S.S. Parmitano. A review
of medical histories yields a notable data point: one
member of the Parmitano’s landing party, Lieutenant
Caleb Murkowski, came down with Delserian bronchitis
three days after their visit. Upon seeing the first instance
of positive progress, Liu insists on testing the prescribed
medication for Delserian bronchitis, phelexynine, on his
genetic samples of the Voiced or, if obtained in Scene 2,
the sample obtained from Shev.
Unfortunately, Shev’s sample does not possess any
biochemical markers matching Delserian bronchitis,
and phelexynine shows no effect on either sample. With
Murkowski’s illness eliminated as a catalyst and no other
visitors to the planet exhibiting any illness during their
presence on the planet, the crew is now at square one in
their research. Federation influence as the chalk’s cause
may have been disproven, which per General Order One
means their efforts must cease.
SALVADOR TRAKAL
INTRODuCTORY ADVENTuRE
341
ACT 3: A DUTY OF CARE
HAVE ONE OF THE PLAYERS INVOLVED IN THE LAND-
ing party read the following:
Our avenues of inquiry linking Dr. Liu’s research
to the chalk have been seemingly expended.
We now find ourselves torn between our duty to
provide humanitarian aid to those needing it and
our adherence to General Order One, the latter of
which states our intervention must end.
not yet attempted to match Shev’s tissue sample to any
other illnesses known to Federation medicine. If they fail
to reach that conclusion via discussion, offer any player
character involved the opportunity to attempt a Reason
+ Medicine task at Difficulty 1 to spark that thought.
You may offer them the opportunity to Succeed at Cost
(see page 259) if they fail the roll. Liu will perk up and
recommend they pursue that avenue.
At this point, the players may attempt to solve this medi-
cal mystery via a group challenge (see page 268 for de-
tails on group challenges). The key tasks are as follows:
: . Optional Scene:
Pleading the Case
The player characters may decide that curing the epi-
demic can still be done while adhering to General Order
One and choose to continue their efforts and deal with
any ramifications afterwards. If they instead decide to be
transparent with Admiral Morozova about their inten-
tions, insert this scene.
TASK 1: MATCH THE PARTICULATE SAMPLE TO
KNOWN ILLNESSES
§ Run a genetic analysis of Shev’s tissue sample and
identify any matches with any disease listed in the
Starfleet Medical database.
§ This is a Control + Science task with a Difficulty of 2.
§ Success yields a list of matches to over 200 illnesses.
The players may continue to Task 2.
§ Failure allows the players to Succeed at Cost; they
may proceed to Task 2, but the analysis lists a broader
range of possibilities numbering over 500. This im-
poses the trait, Imprecise Findings.
Morozova is sympathetic and willing to hear arguments
towards continuing the crew’s efforts but remains
concerned about adhering to General Order One. As
with the optional scene in Act 1, this interaction may
be roleplayed or handled via social conflict, pitting the
player character leading the conversation in a Reason
+ Command opposed task against Morozova’s Control
+ Command. If the player character is successful,
Morozova permits them to continue. If they fail the
social conflict, Morozova still grants permission, though
begrudgingly, and with the condition that they continue
to attempt to link the chalk to the Federation’s activity on
the planet to justify the crew’s further intervention.
If this interaction is roleplayed rather than resolved with
dice rolls, you may choose either of these positions for
Morozova depending on how the discussion goes.
TASK 2: NARROW THE RESULTS
§ Posit a means of eliminating all but the most likely
possibilities.
§ This is a Reason + Medicine task with a Difficulty of
2. The Difficulty increases by 1 if the player has the
Imprecise Findings trait.
§ Success alerts the players they can eliminate any
disease that could not inflict the chalk’s petrification
symptoms. Applying these new parameters narrows
the possibilities to five specific diseases. The player
may continue to Task 3.
§ Failure requires the players to attempt Task 2 again.
: . Scene 1: Starting
from Scratch
Liu has grown despondent in the face of their setback.
The player characters may attempt to sympathize with
him, encourage him to press on, or opt to give him space
and work without him.
You may allow the players to discuss next steps in
researching the cure, either through role-play or
out-of-character discussion. The next step that will lead
them to the ultimate solution is the realization they have
TASK 3: MATCH THE RESULTS
§ Run another comparative analysis to cross-reference
the five diseases against the medical histories of all
Federation parties that visited the planet.
§ This is a Control + Science task with a Difficulty of 3.
342
CHAPTER 10
§ Success reveals that, while none of the subjects were
stricken with any of the five diseases, Dr. Muneeba
Sharif, a crew member aboard the Lederberg that
interacted with the Voiced in disguise, has a family
history and genetic predisposition to one of them,
specifically the neurological condition Axanari necro-
sis. The challenge is completed.
§ Failure requires the players attempt Task 3 again.
Per the Starfleet Medical database, Axanari necrosis
calcifies lung tissue and can be treated with the aero-
solized medication Wylexin-5C. Should the player char-
acters choose to affirm this theory, they may treat Shev’s
sample with Wylexin-5C, which is on hand in medical
stores and able to be synthesized in greater amounts.
Upon introduction to the sample, the Wylexin-5C re-
stores pliability to the tissue particles within seconds,
proving its viability against the chalk.
Liu is relieved but addresses the salient point of how
to administer the medication without further contami-
nating the Voiced’s culture by openly using Federation
medical technology. Again, the player characters may
ponder their options via discussion in or out of charac-
ter. A successful Reason + Medicine task at Difficulty
2, assisted by the ship’s Computers + Medicine, will
reveal that Wylexin-5C need not be directly introduced
into a patient’s airway and may be simply inhaled.
The players should be encouraged to develop ideas to
administer the medication, though are advised that any
plan would have to be performed out of sight, either
ENDING THE MISSION
If the crew is unsuccessful in treating the Voiced or
unable to determine the cause of the chalk, the crew
will be forced to depart Gamma Scorpii V and register
the planet with Starfleet as an infectious biohazard site.
A heartbroken Liu will resign from Stanford Morehouse
and remain on Gamma Scorpii V to continue researching
a cure.
If the crew chose to violate General Order One in
the performance of their mission, regardless if they
succeeded or failed to save the Voiced, the crew is
ordered to report to Vice Admiral Morozova at Starbase
18 for a very unpleasant meeting.
under cover of night or simply from a surreptitious dis-
tance. If they become stuck, allow any player character
to attempt a Daring + Engineering task at Difficulty 2
and present one or more of the options listed below:
§ Fly a shuttlecraft over high-infection areas and “crop-
dust” them with Wylexin-5C
§ Modify DOT-9 maintenance drones to fulfill the
same function
§ Construct dispensing devices that can be beamed in,
deploy their pharmaceutical payload, and be beamed
out
From this point, the player characters may enact whatev-
er plan they choose. Using the shuttlecraft option gives
player characters with a piloting background a spotlight
role, while developing the automated delivery system
or modifying the DOT-9s does the same for engineers.
They could conceivably work together towards a joint
plan that encompasses elements of any or all of the
above options, or any alternative devised by the players.
If the crew is successful in treating the Voiced, any
calcification reverses at twice the rate it progressed and
eventually vanishes with no lingering effects, much to
the Voiced’s collective relief. The player characters may
choose to return to the surface to check on their recov-
ery firsthand. His guilt assuaged, Liu assents to leaving
Gamma Scorpii V and accepts the player characters’
help in dismantling the lab if offered.
: . CONTINUING VOYAGES
IF THE CREW CURED THE CHALK, STARFLEET
Command proceeds with their survey of Gamma Scorpii
V and may enlist the player characters to participate,
giving them more opportunities to study the Voiced. If
the crew was unsuccessful, Starfleet Medical may begin
their own survey into the Voiced and the chalk and the
player characters may be consulted. The crew may also
encounter Liu again, with the mission’s outcome deter-
mining the nature of his work, the course of his life, and
his mental well-being.
Whatever the case, the player characters are now free to
continue charting their destinies among the stars.
INTRODuCTORY ADVENTuRE
343
344
CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 11
ALLIES AND
ADVERSARIES
11.1 Non-Player Characters 346
11.2 Characters 353
11.3 Starships 363
11.4 Creatures 368
CARLOS CABRERA
345
: . CHAPTER 11.1
NON-PLAYER CHARACTERS
“All your people must learn
before you can reach for the stars.”
- Captain James T. Kirk
NPC CATEGORIES
RODRIGO GONZALEZ TOLEDO
COMMANDER
XANTHUS
TH'RAVIQ
The universe is
populated by more
than just your player
characters. This chapter
details non-player
characters (NPCs) and
how to build them to
be used as allies or
antagonists
This chapter also
provides statistics for a
selection of non-player
characters, non-player
starships, and an
assortment of creatures
to use in your missions
and campaigns..
THE MANY LIFE-FORMS CHARACTERS
are likely to face come in many shapes
and sizes, and where some are mighty
entities that can stand alone against
many foes, others function in groups.
The following categories exist for NPCs:
§ MINOR NPCs are rank-and-file per-
sonnel and ordinary people. Minors
are the usual type of NPC present in
a scene. Minor NPCs cannot Avoid
Injury. Minor NPCs never have focus-
es or values. They are incidental char-
acters; they don’t have dialogue, or
speak only a couple of lines, and are
present as an extra in the background,
or an unnamed foe in a battle.
§ NOTABLE NPCs are more dedicated
and resourceful characters, often with
specialist skills and exceptional tal-
ents. Notable NPCs can Avoid Injury
once per scene by spending Threat.
Notable NPCs have a few focuses
and one value. They might be given a
name or speak a few lines of dialogue,
or may get specific attention in a
tense or action-packed scene.
§ MAJOR NPCs are leaders amongst
their kind, with a wide range of skills
and abilities. Major NPCs have no
limit on the number of times they
can Avoid Injury by spending Threat.
Major NPCs are named, developed,
receive plenty of dialogue in the
scenes they appear in, and appear
in several scenes. They’re treated
similarly to player characters in most
ways or are the focal point of involved
or tense scenes. Some Major NPCs
may become recurring allies or adver-
saries (or both).
: . NPCs and
Personal Threat
Notable and Major NPCs have Personal
Threat. This is a separate Threat pool
which may only be used on options
and abilities affecting that NPC directly.
Whenever that NPC spends one or more
Threat, they may spend from the game-
master’s Threat pool, their own Personal
Threat, or both, in any combination.
However, apart from when using their
values, an NPC’s Personal Threat pool
cannot be replenished during a scene. If
an NPC appears in multiple scenes, that
NPC’s Personal Threat is refreshed to
full at the start of each scene.
Notable NPCs typically have 3
Personal Threat. Major NPCs tend to
have 6 or more Personal Threat.
: . NPCs and
Values
NPCs do not have Determination.
However, some NPCs do have values
which they can benefit from. In situ-
ations where an NPC’s value would
apply negatively, the gamemaster
adds 3 Threat to that NPC’s Personal
Threat rather than giving the NPC
Determination. Similarly, when their
value would be beneficial, the NPC may
spend 3 Threat to gain the benefits of
spending Determination.
346
CHAPTER 11
: . Escalation
Many NPCs contain options marked Escalation. These
indicate common variations for that type of NPC that
represent response to a greater danger, or which
themselves make the NPC more dangerous. When
an NPC is brought into a scene, the gamemaster may
spend 1 Threat to add one of the Escalation options to
one NPC of that type.
THE CAST OF ADVERSARIES
The gamemaster takes on the roles of the various
antagonists the player characters encounter. At times,
the gamemaster roleplays and resolves actions for those
characters, from friendly Starfleet admirals to hostile
Klingon aggressors and inquisitive new species.
starships. These rules are streamlined for the gamemas-
ter so you can focus on resolving actions quickly and
allow the player characters to have more of the spotlight
in scenes and encounters.
Roleplaying as a NPC is one direct way to bring stories
to life. Villains are often remembered for their deeds in
Star Trek, from Khan Noonien Singh to the Borg Queen,
Garth of Izar to Gul Dukat. But they are also remembered
for their personalities, which can be as fun to watch as
the players’ favorite episode. You don’t need to deliver
award-winning dialogue, but describing what makes
your NPC an individual makes your game come to life.
NPCs do not have Stress, and cannot Avoid Injury or oth-
er consequences by taking Stress. NPC rules for injuries
and Stress include:
: . NPCs as Opposition
Attempting tasks and acting in combat works the same
for NPCs as it does for player characters. Taking damage
with NPCs and starships, however, is slightly different
from the normal rules for player characters and their
§ A Minor NPC is instantly defeated upon taking any
Injury. A Stun Injury results in the NPC being instant-
ly rendered unconscious. A Deadly Injury results in
the NPC’s immediate death or disintegration (at the
gamemaster’s discretion).
§ A Notable NPC may, once per scene, Avoid Injury by
spending Threat equal to the severity of the Injury.
§ A Major NPC may Avoid Injury by spending Threat
equal to the severity of the Injury. They may do this as
many times per scene as they wish, so long as there
is sufficient Threat.
 NPCs on Either Side
Under most circumstances, the rules for NPCs cover
adversaries—those who are opposed to the player char-
acters’ goals. Most of the time, NPCs whose goals align
with those of the player characters require hard-and-fast
rules to the same degree as adversarial NPCs.
That isn’t always the case, however. And, in some cases,
an NPC’s goals may shift—at some points making them
an ally, while at others making them an opponent. To
handle this, use the following guidelines:
§ IF THE NPC IS AN ADVERSARY: The NPC spends
points from the gamemaster’s Threat pool to buy
Immediate Momentum spends and adds surplus
Momentum to the Threat pool instead of having a
group Momentum pool. Any instance where a player
character would add to Threat, an adversarial NPC
spends from Threat instead. NPC abilities that specifi-
cally cost Threat remove points from the Threat pool.
§ IF THE NPC IS AN ALLY: The NPC may add to or
spend from group Momentum as the player charac-
ters do (the gamemaster may wish to let the players
roll for the NPC’s tasks and control their Momentum
spends). Allied NPCs treat instances where they
would add to Threat in the same way player charac-
ters do. NPC abilities that specifically cost Threat add
points to the Threat pool. Notable and Major NPCs
may spend from their Personal Threat instead of add-
ing to the gamemaster’s Threat pool.
§ CHANGING ALLEGIANCE: In any given scene, an
NPC is either an adversary or an ally (determined by
the gamemaster). This is most likely to be the case
where an NPC is regarded as an adversary for some
purposes (such as social conflict), and an ally for oth-
ers (physical challenges). The gamemaster should try
to avoid situations where the NPC must be both ad-
versary and ally simultaneously, to minimize confusion.
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
347
§ NPC Starships are defeated in the same way as the
players’ ship: after suffering more breaches than the
ship’s Scale, or more breaches to one system than
half the ship’s Scale.
NPC STARSHIPS
An NPC ship does not have specific crew at individual
positions on the bridge. Instead, each NPC vessel has
a Crew Quality providing the attribute and department
ratings needed by the vessel for any given task. NPC
crew used in this way are always considered to have an
applicable focus.
: . Crew Quality
CREW
QUALITY
ATTRIBUTE
RATING
DEPARTMENT
RATING
Basic 8 1
Proficient 9 2
Talented 10 3
Exceptional 11 4
Starships are similar in strength and capabilities to
one another; however, certain ships are significantly
smaller or less well equipped. A good indication of
balance when building a starship combat encounter
is the Scale of a ship. Because NPC starships take as
many turns as their Scale, a starship with Scale 3 will
take about half as many turns as the player characters.
With that in mind, having multiple starships with similar
Scale to the number of players means you will take two
or three times as many turns as the player characters.
Caution should be taken in having too many turns, while
encounters should be balanced so smaller Scale ships
engage the players in groups equaling or exceeding the
players’ vessel’s Scale.
However, there is a limit to this; in any round, each ship
may only attempt one task assisted by each system—
one task assisted by Weapons, one task assisted by
Engines, and so forth—though the gamemaster may
spend 1 Threat when the ship takes a turn to ignore this
limit for that turn.
348
CHAPTER 11
THREAT AS MOMENTUM
The gamemaster’s Threat pool also functions as a pool
of Momentum for NPCs, as well as its usual function of
allowing the gamemaster to alter the scene or encoun-
ter. As such, when NPCs gain excess successes when
attempting tasks or attacks, those extra successes can
be banked just as Momentum can, on a one by one
basis, adding to the Threat pool. You may want to imme-
diately spend that Threat, however, depending on the
circumstances.
: . Creating an NPC
Several NPCs are presented in the following subchap-
ters. However, you may want to create specific NPCs
for a scenario, mission, or even a whole campaign, or
modify the NPCs provided in this book and in other Star
Trek Adventures supplements.
MINOR NPCS
Minor NPCs form the rank-and-file members of an
organization. They are the nameless extras in missions,
as groups to face in an encounter, or as guards for
a Notable or Major NPC. If encountered alone, they
shouldn’t hold up the player characters for long.
To create a Minor NPC:
§ Select their species (from those on pages 100-113 or
from other sources), adding an appropriate species
trait and special rule (if the special rule relates to
Stress or Determination, it doesn’t apply to NPCs).
§ Add a second trait which describes the NPC’s job or
role.
§ Distribute ratings of 9, 9, 8, 8, 7, 7 to their attributes.
Then apply modifiers due to their species.
§ Choose two departments to set to 2, two depart-
ments to set to 1, and leave the other two at 0.
§ Add one or two special rules.
§ Note any significant equipment. If intended to take
part in combat, give them at least one weapon.
NOTABLE NPCS
Notable NPCs are more capable than Minor NPCs, and
are often lieutenants to Major NPCs. They are compa-
rable to supporting characters, and, if encountered as
a group or with several Minor NPCs, can form a more
formidable obstacle and drain the player characters’
resources, forcing them to spend Determination or add
Threat to overcome them.
To create a Notable NPC:
§ Select their species (from those on pages 100-113 or
from other sources), adding an appropriate species
trait, and special rule (if the special rule relates to
Stress or Determination, it doesn’t apply to NPCs).
§ Add a second trait which describes the NPC’s role.
§ Add a value which describes the NPC’s most deeply
held belief or their motivation.
§ Give the NPC’s most important attribute a rating of
10. Then, distribute ratings of 9, 9, 8, 8, and 7 to their
remaining attributes. Finally, apply increases due to
the NPC’s species.
§ Select the NPC’s most important department, and
give it a rating of 3. Choose two other departments
to set to 2, two departments to set to 1, and leave the
last one at 0.
§ Select two or three appropriate focuses.
§ Add two or three special rules, as described on
page 350-page 352.
§ Give the NPC a Personal Threat pool of 3.
§ Note any significant equipment. If intended to take
part in combat, give them at least one weapon.
MAJOR NPCS
Major NPCs are the gamemaster’s equivalent of a player
character. More thought and creativity should be put
into creating a Major NPC, giving them names, back-
grounds, and qualities comparable to player characters.
To create a Major NPC:
§ CONCEPT: Decide what role the Major NPC will play
in the mission, maybe based on their species, role or
position held, or a defining value that governs their
personality.
§ CHOOSE THE CHARACTER’S ROLE: Think about
their role in their organization as well as their rank.
The Major NPC should command some authority,
even if it isn’t recognized by an official body.
§ SELECT TRAITS: Select their species (from those
on pages 100-113 or from other sources), adding an
appropriate species trait, and special rule (if the spe-
cial rule relates to Stress or Determination, it doesn’t
apply to NPCs). Select an additional trait describing
the character’s role or job. Optionally, add a third that
notes some other interesting details about the NPC,
such as their reputation.
§ ASSIGN ATTRIBUTE: Begin every attribute at a rating
of 7 and then assign 14 more points. Apply the char-
acter’s species modifiers as normal, with an upper
limit of 12. The Major NPC should have a total of 59
points in attributes.
§ ASSIGN DEPARTMENTS: Begin every department at
a rating of 1 and then assign 10 more points, with an
upper limit of 5. The Major NPC should have a total of
16 points in departments.
§ CHOOSE FOCUSES: Create up to six focuses.
§ CHOOSE TALENTS: Choose or create four talents or
special rules as described on page 350-page 352.
§ CHOOSE VALUES: Create two to four values.
§ PERSONAL THREAT: Give the Major NPC a Personal
Threat pool of 6, plus 1 for each value.
§ GEAR: Note any significant equipment. If intended to
take part in combat, give them at least one weapon.
NPC SPECIAL RULES
When creating NPCs, you can select talents from the
list beginning on page 149, or other special rules from
the list below. When the special rule calls for a “particu-
lar task” or “acting in a particular way” it is asking for a
limiting factor to the rule. For example, the special rule
could only apply to Security tasks, or would only apply in
circumstances in which the NPC is being threatened by
another character.
§ ADDITIONAL THREAT SPENT: Whenever perform-
ing a task with a particular department, the NPC may
spend 1 Threat to gain a specific or unique benefit.
§ FAMILIARITY: Whenever the NPC attempts to per-
form a particular task, they may reduce the Difficulty
by 2, to a minimum of 0.
§ GUIDANCE: Whenever the NPC assists another NPC
in a particular way, they may re-roll their d20.
§ PROFICIENCY: When performing a particular task, in
a specific way, the first bonus d20 is free.
§ SUBSTITUTION: Whenever the NPC performs a
particular task in a particular way, they may use a
specified different department instead of the normal
department required, and/or may use a specific focus
with a different department.
§ THREATENING: When performing a particular task,
or acting in a specific way, and buying additional d20s
with Threat, the NPC may re-roll a single d20.
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
349
: . Special Rules
There are also several special rules available to NPCs
and creatures that should be used for exceptionally
different or alien adversaries.
AMPHIBIOUS
This creature can move on the ground or through the
water with ease. Complications normally suffered by
a creature moving through an environment in which it
is not native are ignored. This special rule can apply to
any two environments, such as vacuum and magma, or
aquatic and air.
AQUATIC / LIQUID ENVIRONMENT
The being is at home in the water and has physiological
structures that allow them to move through liquids with
ease. While underwater (or another liquid), the being can
move up to two zones with a minor action. The creature
cannot drown while in a liquid environment but may do
so in a non-liquid environment.
CAMOUFLAGED X
The Difficulty of any task to locate the being is increased
by X. The range should be between 1 and 3.
COORDINATION
A group of these creatures can cooperate through
communications of some sort, be it sound, sight, or even
pheromones. These creatures can create advantages for
350
CHAPTER 11
themselves (complications toward the characters) repre-
senting more complex problem-solving and tactics.
ENERGY BASED
The creature’s body is made of coherent energy or
radiation. They may also emit energy from their skin. This
creature’s Protection is increased by 2 against energy
similar to what it is made of. Additionally, any time another
creature makes physical contact with the energy-based
creature, it inflicts a Deadly Injury with a Severity of 1.
EXTRAORDINARY ATTRIBUTE X
One or more of the creature’s attributes are far beyond
the normal range for humanoids. This is indicated by
a number, which is added as automatic successes on
tasks using that attribute. For example, a creature with
Extraordinary Reason 1 gains one success on all tasks
using Reason. Extraordinary attributes will be noted next
to the attribute as an extra value in parentheses.
FAST RECOVERY
The creature recovers from stress and injury quickly. At
the start of each of its turns, if the creature has one or
more Injuries, roll a d20. If you roll equal to or under the
creature’s Fitness, the NPC immediately removes an
Injury. If the NPC has no more Injuries, it immediately
ceases to be Defeated.
MARTIN SOBR
FLIGHT
The creature has the ability to fly through the atmos-
phere of a planet, or ways of propelling it through
the vacuum of space. This creature can move zones
horizontally and vertically. In an atmosphere or gravity
well, a creature must spend at least a minor action to
move each turn or suffer from the effects of falling, but
creatures existing in the vacuum of space don’t have
this restriction. Flying creatures which are stunned or
rendered unconscious fall to the ground.
FORMLESS
This creature can contort their body, or change their
overall shape drastically. They may be able to escape
through small areas, or make themselves appear as
something entirely different, creating traits to represent
the forms they take.
HYPER-AGILE
The Difficulty to hit the creature with a ranged attack is
increased by 1.
IMMUNE TO X
The creature is unperturbed by conditions and effects
caused by one of a number of sources of difficulty or
hindrance, such as vacuum, extremes of temperature,
poison, disease, etc. The most common sources of con-
ditions are described below:
§ COLD: The creature is unaffected by effects derived
from extreme cold, including Stress or Injuries.
§ DISEASE: The creature is immune to the effects of dis-
ease, and will never suffer the symptoms of any disease.
If the creature is exposed to a disease, it may become
a carrier—able to spread the disease if it is contagious.
§ FEAR: The creature is incapable of feeling fear, con-
tinuing undeterred despite the greatest terror. The
creature cannot be intimidated or threatened.
§ HEAT: The creature is unaffected by effects derived
from extreme heat, including Stress or Injuries
caused by fire.
§ PAIN: The creature is incapable of feeling pain, con-
tinuing undeterred despite the most horrific Injury.
The creature ignores all Stun Injuries, and cannot be
Defeated by an attack which inflicts a Stun Injury.
§ POISON: The creature is unaffected by all forms of
poison, venom, and toxin, and cannot suffer Stress or
Injuries from them.
§ VACUUM: The creature suffers no Injuries from being
exposed to hard vacuum, or other extremes of atmos-
pheric pressure, and cannot suffocate.
INCORPOREAL
Incorporeal NPCs—also including energy, gaseous, or
fluid creatures, and “creatures” composed of a swarm of
tiny creatures—are only partially of the physical uni-
verse, and they do not fully interact with it physically.
The NPC gains 3 Protection. There may be some form of
special energy or radiation-based attack which ignores
this Protection, at the gamemaster’s discretion. The NPC
may move freely through rough or difficult terrain, but they
cannot move through larger or heavier physical barriers.
INITIATIVE X
The creature is fast enough to act more than once per
round. Unless otherwise noted, creatures have Initiative
1; if they have a higher number, they may take X turns
each round.
INTENSIVE TRAINING
Members of this group are given considerable training
in a wide range of fields. They have a minimum of 1 in
all departments: when creating an NPC with this ability,
increase any department with a rating of 0 to 1.
INVULNERABLE
The creature is impervious to harm and cannot be
Injured in any way; Attacks can be attempted, but it
cannot suffer Injuries. This can take different forms, as
described below. These variations can be combined.
§ SPECIFIC WEAKNESS: The creature has a specific
weakness—a weak spot, a certain frequency of energy,
a certain material—which can overcome its invulnera-
bility. If this weakness is discovered and employed, then
the creature can be Injured by Attacks which exploit that
weakness (this also bypasses the effects of the other
Invulnerable variations). The gamemaster’s discretion
applies as to how the weakness may be discovered.
§ STAGGERED: The creature cannot be Injured, but it
can be slowed down. If the creature would ever suffer
an Injury, it instead loses the ability to perform any
actions on its next turn. This effect is not cumulative.
§ WRATHFUL: The creature grows angry when chal-
lenged; each time the creature would be Injured, it
instead adds 2 Threat.
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
351
MACHINE
The creature is not a living being, but a machine, or
some form of cybernetic organism. It is highly resistant
to environmental conditions, reducing the Difficulty of
tasks to resist extremes of heat and cost by 2, and it
is immune to the effects of suffocation, hard vacuum,
starvation, and thirst.
MENACING X
When a creature with this rule enters a scene, immedi-
ately add X Threat. This applies whether the NPC is an
adversary or an ally.
MIMICRY
The creature has the capability to mimic a certain sense
that it has experienced, such as a parrot mimicking
speech, or perhaps a shape-shifting creature appearing
as a humanoid they’ve encountered before.
MULTI-LIMBED
The creature has more than two limbs that it can attack
with at once effectively. If it succeeds at an attack, it
adds 1 Threat.
MULTIDIMENSIONAL
This creature can move through walls and barriers and
avoid simple attacks, as determined by the gamemaster,
simply by moving itself out of observable space-time and
re-entering it elsewhere.
NATURAL PROTECTION X
The creature has X Protection.
NIGHT VISION
The creature is unaffected by any traits which represent
darkness or poor lighting.
RAM
A creature may improve attacks with its horns, claws,
or tail to represent gaining momentum through
charging forward, spinning, or otherwise putting all it
can into the attack. The creature may add the Intense
quality to its melee attacks by taking the Prepare minor
action before attacking.
352
CHAPTER 11
RESILIENT
Whenever the creature suffers an Injury, roll a d20. If you
roll equal to or under the creature’s Fitness, that Injury is
not inflicted. Do this before deciding to Avoid Injury.
SENSE SPECTRUM
These creatures may “see” with X-rays, or hear sounds
far too high pitched to often be considered useful. They
may “smell” by sensing subspace particles, or even feel
where their prey is through detecting the pattern of time
surrounding its target.
STURDY
This creature cannot be knocked prone.
THREAT GESTURE
The creature can suddenly rear up on its hind legs
and tower over its prey, bellow an intimidating roar,
suddenly display brightly colored spines, or even spray
noxious juices in defense of itself. Once per encounter,
the creature may make an opposed task of Presence
+ Command or Security. Characters that tie or fail that
task are knocked prone as they backpedal, are startled,
or otherwise pause due to a flight-or-fight response.
TOOL USER
While not sentient or self-aware, these creatures have a
nervous system advanced enough to be able to manipu-
late the environment somehow in their favor. These crea-
tures can be taught how to use simple devices or tools,
or perhaps can learn through observation.
TOXIC, POISONOUS, OR VENOMOUS
Creatures that by their inherent nature can cause harm
to other creatures through toxins they naturally produce
or via microorganisms they symbiotically exist with are
Toxic or Poisonous. Creatures that have venom sacks
like snakes, or creatures that deliver toxins with an
attack, are considered Venomous. Regardless of this
distinction, a gamemaster can determine what is toxic
or venomous about a creature. Any attack against, or by,
the creature can have this as an additional trait.
: . Creature Qualities
Some creatures have attacks or weapons that include
qualities, much the way character weapons have quali-
ties. See page 241 for the list of weapon qualities.
: . CHAPTER 11.2
CHARACTERS
Starfleet Officer
Minor NPC
A typical Starfleet officer.
TRAITS: Species (add 3 points to attributes based on
species), Starfleet Officer
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 10
PRESENCE 09
DARING 10
REASON 09
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE 01
CONN 01
SECURITY 01
SCIENCE 01
FITNESS 08
INSIGHT 08
Section 31 Operative
Notable NPC
A member of Starfleet’s secret branch of intelligence,
Section 31.
TRAITS: Federation Species (add 3 points to attributes
based on species), Starfleet Intelligence Operative
VALUE: The ends justify the means
FOCUSES: Espionage, Infiltration
PERSONAL THREAT: 3 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 11
FITNESS 07
PRESENCE 09
DARING 08
INSIGHT 10
REASON 09
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 01
CONN 01
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE 02
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Phaser Type-1: Ranged, Stun/Deadly 3, Size 1H,
Hidden 1, Charge
§ Escalation 1 Phaser Type-2: Ranged, Stun/Deadly 4,
Size 1H, Charge
Special Rules
§ INTENSIVE TRAINING: See page 351.
GAMEMASTER NOTE: Add 1 point to two different
department ratings to create different types (e.g., +1 to
Engineering and Conn for a conn officer).
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Phaser Type-1: Ranged, Stun/Deadly 3, Size 1H,
Hidden 1, Charge
§ Escalation 1 Phaser Type-2: Ranged, Stun/Deadly 4,
Size 1H, Charge
Special Rules
§ ADAPTABLE: A Section 31 operative
may spend 2 Threat to gain a single
focus for the remainder of the scene.
§ COVERT: Whenever required to attempt
a task to conceal their activities for
Section 31—including to maintain their
cover identity—they may roll an addi-
tional d20.
§ INTENSIVE TRAINING: See page 351.
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
353
Captain T’Mek
Major NPC
Starfleet captains command most Starfleet starships
and space stations, and are responsible for their crews
and for executing Starfleet’s orders. Captain T’Mek is
representative of this type of officer.
TRAITS: Vulcan, Starfleet Officer, Commanding Officer
VALUES: Wisdom is the beginning of logic, not the end
A failure to act can be as dangerous as acting rashly
FOCUSES: Astrophysics, Composure, Diplomacy,
Starship Tactics
PERSONAL THREAT: 8 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 12
FITNESS 09
PRESENCE 10
DARING 09
INSIGHT 08
REASON 11
Rear Admiral Thy'ran
Major NPC
Starfleet admirals command Starfleet assets in entire
regions or sectors of space, and often act with great
latitude as required. Thyran is representative of this type
of officer.
TRAITS: Andorian, Starfleet Flag Officer, Strategist
VALUES: There is no higher calling than to serve
We endure hardship, so that others do not have to
FOCUSES: Endurance, Fleet Strategy and Tactics,
Inspiration, Military History
PERSONAL THREAT: 8 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 08
PRESENCE 12
DARING 11
REASON 10
Departments
COMMAND 04
ENGINEERING 03
MEDICINE 02
CONN 03
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE 01
FITNESS 09
INSIGHT 09
354
CHAPTER 11
Departments
COMMAND 04
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 01
CONN 03
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE 04
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Vulcan Nerve Pinch: Melee, Stun 3, Size 1H, Intense
§ Phaser Type-2: Ranged, Stun/Deadly 4, Size 1H,
Hidden 1, Charge
§ Escalation 1 Phaser Type-2: Ranged, Stun/Deadly 5,
Size 1H, Charge
Special Rules
§ CONSIDERED EVERY OUTCOME: When she suc-
ceeds at a Reason + Command task, T’Mek scores
one more Momentum than normal.
§ INTENSIVE TRAINING: See page 351.
§ NERVE PINCH (VULCAN TALENT): See page 154.
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Phaser Type-2: Ranged, Stun/Deadly 4, Size 1H,
Hidden 1, Charge
Special Rules
§ PROUD AND HONORABLE: Whenever he attempts a
task to resist being coerced into breaking a promise,
betraying his allies, or otherwise acting dishonorably,
he may spend Threat to immediately succeed at the
task. The amount of Threat he spends is equal to the
task’s Difficulty.
§ ACCOMPLISHED STRATEGIST: Whenever he at-
tempts to create a trait representing a strategy or plan,
he may spend 1 Threat to re-roll his dice pool.
§ COUNTER-PLOY: Whenever an enemy attempts a task
to create a trait representing some manner of strategy
or tactic, Thyran may spend 1 Threat to increase the
Difficulty by 1. Further, if this task then fails, Thyran
may immediately spend one additional Threat to create
a trait of his own, representing his own stratagem.
§ INTENSIVE TRAINING: See page 351.
Klingon Warrior
Minor NPC
A worthy warrior of the Klingon Empire.
TRAITS: Klingon, Warrior
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 1
Attributes
CONTROL 07
DARING 10
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ D’k tahg dagger: Melee, Deadly 2, Size 1H, Hidden 1
§ Escalation 1 Bat’leth: Melee, Deadly 3, Size 2H
§ Disruptor Pistol: Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense
Special Rule
§ WARRIOR’S SPIRIT: See page 153.
FITNESS 10
INSIGHT 07
PRESENCE 09
REASON 08
Departments
COMMAND 01
CONN 02
ENGINEERING 01
SECURITY 02
MEDICINE
SCIENCE
–
–
Klingon Veteran
Notable NPC
A battle-hardened Klingon warrior.
TRAITS: Klingon, Warrior
VALUE: Today is a Good Day to Die!
FOCUSES: Hand-to-Hand Combat, Resilience
PERSONAL THREAT: 3 PROTECTION: 1
Attributes
CONTROL 08
DARING 11
FITNESS 10
INSIGHT 08
PRESENCE 10
REASON 07
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE 01
CONN 02
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE
–
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ D’k tahg dagger: Melee, Deadly 2, Size 1H, Hidden 1
§ Escalation 1 Bat’leth: Melee, Deadly 3, Size 2H
§ Disruptor Pistol: Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense
§ Escalation 1 Disruptor Rifle: Ranged, Deadly 5,
Size 2H, Accurate, Intense
Special Rules
§ WARRIOR’S SPIRIT: See page 153.
§ LEAD BY EXAMPLE: When the Klingon Officer makes a
successful attack, they may spend 2 Threat to assist an-
other Klingon’s next attack with his Daring + Command.
TOMA FEIZO GAS
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
355
Moq’var, Son of Koloth
Major NPC
Klingon commanders guide their ships through the
quadrants, seeking honor and glory for themselves
and their crews, and resources to benefit the Empire.
Moq’var is representative of this type of officer.
TRAITS: Klingon, Commanding Officer
VALUES: There is nothing more honorable than victory
To kill the defenseless is not true battle
FOCUSES: Hand-to-Hand Combat, Intimidation,
Resilience, Starship Tactics
PERSONAL THREAT: 8 PROTECTION: 1
Attributes
CONTROL 09
FITNESS 10
PRESENCE 11
DARING 12
INSIGHT 09
REASON 08
Departments
COMMAND 03
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 02
CONN 03
SECURITY 05
SCIENCE 01
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ D’k tahg dagger: Melee, Deadly 2, Size 1H, Hidden 1
§ Disruptor Pistol: Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense
§ Escalation 1 Bat’leth: Melee, Deadly 3, Size 2H
Special Rules
§ HARDY: Moq’var is resilient and can shrug off wounds
that would down normal combatants. Moq’var’s
Personal Threat is increased by +2 (included above).
§ LEAD BY EXAMPLE: When Moq’var makes a success-
ful attack, they may spend 2 Threat to assist another
Klingon’s next attack with his Daring + Command.
§ WARRIOR’S SPIRIT: See page 153.
FITNESS 09
INSIGHT 08
Romulan Uhlan
Minor NPC
A rank-and-file soldier of the Romulan Star Empire.
TRAITS: Romulan, Soldier
FOCUSES: Astrophysics, Composure, Diplomacy,
Starship Tactics
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 10
PRESENCE 07
DARING 08
REASON 10
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE
–
CONN 02
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE
–
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Dagger: Melee, Deadly 2, Size 1h, Hidden 1, Charge
§ Disruptor Pistol: Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense
§ Escalation 1 Disruptor Rifle: Ranged, Deadly 5,
Size 2H, Accurate, Intense
Special Rules
§ GUILE AND CUNNING: See page 153.
§ WARY: See page 154.
356
CHAPTER 11
TOMA FEIZO GAS
Romulan Centurion
Notable NPC
An experienced soldier in the Romulan services.
TRAITS: Romulan, Imperial Navy Officer
VALUE: I will not fail in my duty to the Empire
FOCUSES: Guerilla Tactics, Paranoia
PERSONAL THREAT: 3 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 11
DARING 09
Departments
COMMAND 03
ENGINEERING 01
CONN 02
SECURITY 02
FITNESS 09
INSIGHT 09
PRESENCE 07
REASON 09
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Dagger: Melee, Deadly 2, Size 1H, Hidden 1, Charge
§ Disruptor Pistol: Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense
§ Escalation 1 Disruptor Rifle: Ranged, Deadly 5,
Size 2H, Accurate, Intense
Special Rules
§ GROUP AMBUSH: When the centurion makes an
attack against an enemy who is unaware of their
presence, they may spend 2 Threat to increase the
severity of this and all other attacks made this round
by them and their subordinates by 1.
§ GUILE AND CUNNING: See page 153.
§ WARY: See page 154.
MEDICINE
–
SCIENCE 01
Major Verohk, Tal Shiar Agent
Major NPC
Verohk is a member of the Romulan Empire’s intelli-
gence arm, the Tal Shiar.
TRAITS: Romulan, Agent of the Tal Shiar
VALUES: The ends justify the means
Everything I do, I do for Romulus
FOCUSES: Deception, Infiltration, Interrogation,
Propaganda
PERSONAL THREAT: 8 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 11
PRESENCE 09
DARING 09
REASON 11
Departments
COMMAND 04
ENGINEERING 03
MEDICINE 02
CONN 02
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE 03
FITNESS 09
INSIGHT 10
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Dagger: Melee, Deadly 2, Size 1h, Hidden 1, Charge
§ Disruptor Pistol: Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense
§ Escalation 1 Disruptor Rifle: Ranged, Deadly 5,
Size 2H, Accurate, Intense
Special Rules
§ GUILE AND CUNNING: See page 153.
§ SUPREME AUTHORITY: Whenever a Romulan under
Major Verohk’s command attempts a task to resist
persuasion or intimidation, Verohk may spend 1
Threat to allow that Romulan to re-roll, even if Verohk
is not present in the scene herself.
§ WARY: See page 154.
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
357
Cardassian Soldier
Minor NPC
Representative of countless Cardassian soldiers pro-
tecting Cardassian interests.
TRAITS: Cardassian, Soldier
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 1
Attributes
CONTROL 10
PRESENCE 08
DARING 09
REASON 09
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE
–
CONN 03
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE
–
FITNESS 08
INSIGHT 07
Cardassian Glinn
Notable NPC
An experienced and loyal Cardassian soldier with rank
and responsibility to lead others.
TRAITS: Cardassian, Military Officer
VALUE: Cardassians did not choose to be superior, fate
made us this way
FOCUSES: Military Tactics, Willpower
PERSONAL THREAT: 3 PROTECTION: 1
Attributes
CONTROL 11
PRESENCE 10
DARING 08
REASON 10
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE
–
CONN 02
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE 01
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Disruptor Pistol: Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense
§ Escalation 1 Disruptor Rifle: Ranged, Deadly 5,
Size 2H, Accurate, Intense
FITNESS 07
INSIGHT 08
358
CHAPTER 11
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Disruptor Pistol: Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense
§ Escalation 1 Disruptor Rifle: Ranged, Deadly 5,
Size 2H, Accurate, Intense
Special Rules
§ HEALTHY SUSPICIONS: The Cardassian Soldier may
buy their first d20 for free when attempting to deter-
mine if someone is lying.
§ LOYAL: Whenever a Cardassian assists a task per-
formed by someone they deem their superior, they
may reroll their assistance die.
Special Rules
§ HEALTHY SUSPICIONS: The Cardassian Glinn may
buy their first d20 for free when attempting to deter-
mine if someone is lying.
§ EXPECTS SUCCESS: Whenever the Cardassian Glinn
uses the Direct or Assist task to aid a subordinate, that
task may always Succeed at Cost.
§ LOYAL: Whenever a Cardassian Glinn assists a task
performed by someone they deem their superior, they
may reroll their assist die.
TOMA FEIZO GAS
Gul Tremak
Major NPC
Cardassian Guls are placed in charge of warships or
Cardassian facilities, including the command of occu-
pied colonies or worlds. Gul Tremak is representative of
this type of officer.
TRAIT: Cardassian, Military Officer
VALUES: Cardassia expects everyone to do their duty
Knowledge is power, and power is everything
FOCUSES: Debate, Military Tactics, Politics, Willpower
PERSONAL THREAT: 8 PROTECTION: 1
Attributes
CONTROL 11
PRESENCE 12
DARING 09
REASON 10
Departments
COMMAND 04
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 01
CONN 04
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE 02
FITNESS 08
INSIGHT 09
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Disruptor Pistol: Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense
§ Escalation 1 Disruptor Rifle: Ranged, Deadly 5,
Size 2H, Accurate, Intense
Special Rules
§ CULTURED: When engaged in social conflict, and
given an opportunity to speak at length on a subject,
Gul Tremak if he purchases any bonus d20s he may
re-roll his dice pool.
§ HEALTHY SUSPICIONS: Gul Tremak may buy their
first d20 for free when attempting to determine if
someone is lying.
§ LOYAL: Whenever Gul Tremak assists a task per-
formed by someone they deem their superior they
may reroll their assistance die.
§ RUTHLESS: When Gul Tremak makes an attack against
an enemy that was not aware of or prepared for an attack,
or against an enemy that is defenseless, he may spend
1 Threat to re-roll any number of d20s in his dice pool.
Ferengi Menial
Minor NPC
Representative of a young Ferengi working their way
up into the world, or of a Ferengi lacking the lobes for
independent success.
TRAITS: Ferengi, Underling
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 09
FITNESS 07
PRESENCE 10
DARING 07
INSIGHT 10
REASON 08
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE
CONN 02
SECURITY 01
SCIENCE
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Phaser Type-1: Ranged, Stun/Deadly 3, Size 1H,
Hidden 1, Charge
Special Rule
§ GREED IS ETERNAL: See page 152.
–
–
TOMA FEIZO GAS
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
359
Ferengi Salesman
Notable NPC
An experienced Ferengi with some latinum and prestige
to their name, always looking for the next deal to make
themselves wealthier.
TRAITS: Ferengi, Merchant
VALUE: First Rule of Acquisition: Once you have their
money, never give it back
FOCUSES: Economics, Negotiation
PERSONAL THREAT: 3 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 09
PRESENCE 10
DARING 08
REASON 08
FITNESS 07
INSIGHT 09
DaiMon Skel
Major NPC
A DaiMon is often either an experienced businessman,
with large lobes for business, or a military officer with
a ship of their own and the will to use it effectively. The
most cunning are both. DaiMon Skel is representative of
such an officer.
TRAITS: Ferengi, Entrepreneur
VALUES: 48th Rule of Acquisition: The bigger the smile,
the sharper the knife
211th Rule of Acquisition: Employees are the rungs on
the ladder to success; don’t hesitate to step on them
FOCUSES: Bribery, Negotiation, Starship Tactics,
Subterfuge
PERSONAL THREAT: 8 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 10
FITNESS 08
PRESENCE 11
DARING 11
INSIGHT 10
REASON 09
360
CHAPTER 11
Departments
COMMAND 03
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE
–
CONN 01
SECURITY 01
SCIENCE 02
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike (Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H)
§ Disruptor Pistol (Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense)
Special Rules
§ GREED IS ETERNAL: See page 152.
§ NEVER PLACE FRIENDSHIP ABOVE PROFIT:
See page 152.
Departments
COMMAND 04
ENGINEERING 03
MEDICINE 01
CONN 03
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE 02
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
§ Energy Whip: Ranged, Stun 4, Size 1H, Intense
§ Phaser Type-1: Ranged, Stun/Deadly 3, Size 1H,
Charge, Hidden 1
Special Rules
§ FREE ADVICE IS SELDOM CHEAP: Increase the
Difficulty of all social conflict tasks to persuade
DaiMon Skel by 2. This Difficulty increase is removed
as soon as Skel is offered something in trade.
§ YOU CAN’T MAKE A DEAL IF YOU’RE DEAD:
DaiMon Skel will never make a Deadly attack. Further,
when attempting a task to make a deal or persuade an
enemy he has previously incapacitated, or an enemy
who obviously outmatches him, he may add a bonus
d20 to the roll for free.
§ GREED IS ETERNAL: See page 152.
Jem’Hadar Warrior
Minor NPC
One of countless genetically engineered warriors de-
signed to obey and to follow the Founders’ will through
their Vorta handlers.
TRAITS: Jem’Hadar, Warrior
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 1
Attributes
CONTROL 08
PRESENCE 07
DARING 10
REASON 07
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE
–
CONN 02
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE
–
FITNESS 10
INSIGHT 09
Jem’Hadar First
Notable NPC
An battle-tested warrior who has seen their share of
battle, a Jem’Hadar First is a fearsome opponent on the
battlefield.
TRAITS: Jem’Hadar, Warrior
VALUE: We are now dead; we go into battle to reclaim
our lives
FOCUSES: Combat Tactics, Hand-to-Hand
PERSONAL THREAT: 3 PROTECTION: 1
Attributes
CONTROL 09
PRESENCE 08
DARING 10
REASON 07
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE 01
CONN 02
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE
–
FITNESS 11
INSIGHT 09
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun/Deadly 2, Size 1H,
Intense
§ Blade: Melee, Deadly 3, Size 1H
§ Jem’Hadar Plasma Rifle: Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 2H,
Accurate, Debilitating
§ Escalation 1 Kar’takin: Melee, Deadly 3, Size 2H
Special Rules
§ BRUTE FORCE: Jem’Hadar add the Intense effect to
their Unarmed Strike, and may attack with Deadly force.
§ THE SHROUD: A Jem’Hadar may spend 1 Threat as
a minor action to become virtually invisible, increas-
ing the Difficulty of all tasks to observe, locate, or
target the Jem’Hadar by 3. This effect ends when the
Jem’Hadar makes an Attack, or takes a minor action to
end the effect. The Jem’Hadar loses this ability when
deprived of ketracel-white.
§ IMMUNE TO FEAR: See page 351.
§ IMMUNE TO PAIN: See page 351.
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun/Deadly 2, Size 1H,
Intense
§ Blade: Melee, Deadly 3, Size 1H
§ Jem’Hadar Plasma Rifle: Ranged, Deadly 4, Size 2H,
Accurate, Debilitating
§ Escalation 1 Kar’takin: Melee, Deadly 3, Size 2H
Special Rules
§ BRUTE FORCE: Jem’Hadar add the Intense effect to
their Unarmed Strike, and may attack with Deadly force.
§ THE SHROUD: A Jem’Hadar may spend 2 Threat as a
minor action to become virtually invisible, increasing
the Difficulty of all tasks to observe, locate, or target
the Jem’Hadar by three. This effect ends when the
Jem’Hadar makes an Attack, or takes a minor action to
end the effect. The Jem’Hadar loses this ability when
deprived of ketracel-white.
§ VICTORY IS LIFE: Whenever a Jem’Hadar First or one
of its subordinates inflicts an Injury or achieves an
objective, add 1 Threat.
§ IMMUNE TO FEAR: See page 351.
§ IMMUNE TO PAIN: See page 351.
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
361
Taris, Vorta Overseer
Major NPC
Vorta act as the mouthpieces for the Founders, the
leaders of the Dominion. Vorta oversee the Jem’Hadar
and command them through threats and through the
warriors’ dependence on ketracel-white. Taris is repre-
sentative of the genetically-engineered Vorta.
TRAITS: Vorta, Diplomat
VALUES: I live to serve the Founders
There is nothing I will not do to succeed
FOCUSES: Deception, Diplomacy, Observation,
Psychology
PERSONAL THREAT: 8 PROTECTION: 0
Departments
COMMAND 04
CONN 03
ENGINEERING 02
SECURITY 02
MEDICINE 02
SCIENCE 03
Attacks
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
Special Rules
§ IN THE NAME OF THE FOUNDERS: When using the
Direct or Assist task to command other servants of
the Dominion, a Vorta may roll 2d20 instead of 1d20.
§ MANIPULATIVE: If Taris purchases one or more
d20s when attempting a task to deceive or intimidate
another, she may re-roll her dice pool.
Attributes
CONTROL 09
DARING 08
FITNESS 09
INSIGHT 11
PRESENCE 12
REASON 10
JOSHUA CALLOWAY
362
CHAPTER 11
: . CHAPTER 11.3
STARSHIPS
Galaxy-class
Constitution-class
ENGINES 08
SENSORS 08
In the 23rd century, Constitution-class vessels were
Starfleet’s primary exploration vessels. The following
represents a standard starship of the class.
CREW QUALITY: Talented (Attribute 10, Department 3)
MISSION PROFILE: Multirole Explorer
TRAITS: Federation Starship, Constitution class
SCALE: 4 RESISTANCE: 3
SHIELDS (14):
Systems
COMMS 07
STRUCTURE 07
COMPUTERS 08
WEAPONS 07
Departments
COMMAND 03
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 02
CONN 02
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE 03
Attacks
§ PHASER BANKS: Energy, Medium, Damage 6,
Versatile 2
§ PHOTON TORPEDOES: Torpedo, Long, Damage 4,
High Yield
§ TRACTOR BEAM (STRENGTH 3)
Talents
§ IMPROVED HULL INTEGRITY: See page 223.
§ MODULAR LABORATORIES: See page 224.
§ REDUNDANT SYSTEMS (ENGINES): See page 225.
§ RUGGED DESIGN: See page 225.
Special Rule
§ SAUCER SEPARATION: See page 196.
In the mid-24th century, Galaxy-class vessels were
designed to be deep space explorers and often served
as an admiral’s flagship. The following represents a
standard starship of the class.
CREW QUALITY: Talented (Attribute 10, Department 3)
MISSION PROFILE: Multirole Explorer
TRAITS: Federation Starship, Galaxy class, A City in Space
SCALE: 6 RESISTANCE: 5
SHIELDS (18):
Systems
COMMS 09
ENGINES 10
STRUCTURE 10
COMPUTERS 10
SENSORS 10
WEAPONS 10
Departments
COMMAND 03
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 03
CONN 02
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE 03
Attacks
§ PHASER ARRAYS: Energy, Medium, Damage 8,
Versatile 2, Area or Spread
§ PHOTON TORPEDOES: Torpedo, Long, Damage 5,
High Yield
§ TRACTOR BEAM (STRENGTH 5)
Talents
§ ADVANCED RESEARCH FACILITIES: See page 219.
§ HIGH-RESOLUTION SENSORS: See page 223.
§ IMPROVED POWER SYSTEMS: See page 223.
§ MODULAR LABORATORIES: See page 224.
§ REDUNDANT SYSTEMS (STRUCTURE): See page 225.
§ SECONDARY REACTORS: See page 225.
Special Rules
§ ABUNDANT PERSONNEL: See page 196.
§ SAUCER SEPARATION AND RECONNECTION:
See page 196.
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
363
D7 Battlecruiser
In the 23rd century, the D7 battlecruiser was the main-
stay of the Klingon Defense Force.
CREW QUALITY: Proficient (Attribute 9, Department 2)
MISSION PROFILE: Battlecruiser
TRAITS: Klingon Starship, Symbol of Klingon Unity
SCALE: 4 RESISTANCE: 3
SHIELDS (17):
ENGINES 08
SENSORS 07
Systems
COMMS 07
STRUCTURE 08
COMPUTERS 07
WEAPONS 10
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 01
CONN 03
SECURITY 05
SCIENCE 02
Attacks
§ DISRUPTOR CANNONS: Energy, Close, Damage 8,
Intense
§ PHASER BANKS: Energy, Medium, Damage 7,
Versatile 2
§ PHOTON TORPEDOES: Torpedo, Long, Damage 5,
High Yield
§ TRACTOR BEAM (STRENGTH 3)
Talents
§ BACKUP EPS CONDUITS: See page 220.
§ CLOAKING DEVICE: See page 220.
§ FAST TARGETING SYSTEMS: See page 223.
§ RUGGED DESIGN: See page 225.
364
CHAPTER 11
B’rel-class Bird of Prey
The B’rel class is one of the most common types of
Klingon scout or raider encountered in the Alpha and
Beta Quadrants.
CREW QUALITY: Proficient (Attribute 9, Department 2)
MISSION PROFILE: Patrol
TRAITS: Klingon Starship, B’rel class, Bird of Prey,
Agile Raider
SCALE: 3 RESISTANCE: 3
SHIELDS (15):
ENGINES 09
SENSORS 08
Systems
COMMS 08
STRUCTURE 07
COMPUTERS 07
WEAPONS 09
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE 02
CONN 04
SECURITY 05
SCIENCE 02
Attacks
§ DISRUPTOR CANNONS: Energy, Close, Damage 7,
Intense
§ PHOTON TORPEDOES: Torpedo, Long, Damage 5,
High Yield
§ TRACTOR BEAM (STRENGTH 2)
Talents
§ CLOAKING DEVICE: See page 220.
§ FAST TARGETING SYSTEMS: See page 223.
§ HIGH-RESOLUTION SENSORS: See page 223.
Special Rule
§ LANDING GEAR: See page 196.
THOMAS MARRONE
T’Liss-class Bird of Prey
The T’Liss class was the primary scout ship type of the
23rd century Romulan Navy.
CREW QUALITY: Talented (Attribute 10, Department 3)
MISSION PROFILE: Pathfinder and Reconnaissance
Operations
TRAITS: Romulan Bird of Prey, Experimental
SCALE: 4 RESISTANCE: 3
SHIELDS (14):
Systems
COMMS 06
ENGINES 08
STRUCTURE 07
COMPUTERS 08
SENSORS 09
WEAPONS 09
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 03
MEDICINE 01
CONN 04
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE 02
Attacks
§ DISRUPTOR BANKS: Energy, Close, Damage 7,
Intense
§ PLASMA TORPEDOES: Torpedo, Long, Damage 7,
Calibration, Cumbersome, Persistent
§ TRACTOR BEAM (STRENGTH 3)
Talents
§ CLOAKING DEVICE: See page 220.
§ ELECTRONIC WARFARE SYSTEMS: See page 222.
§ IMPROVED REACTION CONTROL SYSTEM:
See page 224.
§ REDUCED SENSOR SILHOUETTE: See page 225.
Special Rule
§ PROTOTYPE: See page 216.
THOMAS MARRONE
D’Deridex-class Warbird
The mainstay of the mid-to-late 24th century Romulan
fleet, the D’Deridex-class warbirds were more than a
match for most Federation and Klingon starships of
the time.
CREW QUALITY: Talented (Attribute 10, Department 3)
MISSION PROFILE: Espionage and Intelligence
TRAITS: Romulan Starship, Imposing
SCALE: 7 RESISTANCE: 7
SHIELDS (22):
Systems
COMMS 09
ENGINES 10
STRUCTURE 11
COMPUTERS 10
SENSORS 11
WEAPONS 09
Departments
COMMAND 03
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 01
CONN 02
SECURITY 04
SCIENCE 03
Attacks
§ DISRUPTOR BANKS: Energy, Medium, Damage 9,
Intense
§ PLASMA TORPEDOES: Torpedo, Long, Damage 7,
Persistent, Calibration, Cumbersome
§ TRACTOR BEAM (STRENGTH 5)
Talents
§ CLOAKING DEVICE: See page 220.
§ ELECTRONIC WARFARE SYSTEMS: See page 222.
§ FAST TARGETING SYSTEM: See page 223.
§ IMPROVED DAMAGE CONTROL: See page 223.
§ REDUCED SENSOR SILHOUETTE: See page 225.
§ SECONDARY REACTORS: See page 225.
Special Rule
§ ABUNDANT PERSONNEL: See page 196.
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
365
Galor-class Cruiser
The main battle cruiser of the Cardassian navy, a bit
dated as of the mid- 24th century, but capable enough to
suppress most resistance.
CREW QUALITY: Proficient (Attribute 9, Department 2)
MISSION PROFILE: Patrol
TRAITS: Cardassian Starship, Galor class
SCALE: 4 RESISTANCE: 3
SHIELDS (16):
Systems
COMMS 09
COMPUTERS 08
ENGINES 09
SENSORS 08
STRUCTURE 08
WEAPONS 09
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 02
CONN 03
SECURITY 04
SCIENCE 02
Attacks
§ PHASER BANKS: Energy, Medium, Damage 7,
Versatile 2
§ DISRUPTOR SPINAL LANCE: Energy, Long, Damage
9, Intense, Cumbersome
§ TRACTOR BEAM (STRENGTH 3)
Talents
§ HIGH-RESOLUTION SENSORS: See page 213.
§ RUGGED DESIGN: See page 214
366
CHAPTER 11
D’Kora-class Marauder
In the 24th century, the D’Kora class was the largest
Ferengi starship in the Ferengi navy, though a number
were sold to independent merchant-captains as well.
CREW QUALITY: Proficient (Attribute 9, Department 2)
MISSION PROFILE: Flagship
TRAITS: Ferengi Marauder, D’Kora class, The Best
Latinum Can Buy
SCALE: 5 RESISTANCE: 5
SHIELDS (18):
ENGINES 10
SENSORS 09
Systems
COMMS 09
STRUCTURE 10
COMPUTERS 08
WEAPONS 07
Departments
COMMAND 04
ENGINEERING 03
MEDICINE 01
CONN 01
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE 03
Attacks
§ PHASER BANKS: Energy, Medium, Damage 7,
Versatile 2
§ DISRUPTOR BANKS: Energy, Medium, Damage 7,
Intense
§ ELECTROMAGNETIC CANNON: Energy, Close,
Damage 8, Dampening, Piercing
§ TRACTOR BEAM (STRENGTH 4)
Talents
§ ADVANCED SHIELDS: See page 219.
§ DELUXE GALLEY: See page 221.
§ DIPLOMATIC SUITES: See page 221.
§ ELECTRONIC WARFARE SYSTEMS: See page 222.
§ HIGH-RESOLUTION SENSORS: See page 223.
THOMAS MARRONE
Jem’Hadar Attack Ship
The primary fighter of the Dominion, used by the
Jem’Hadar to strike fear into the hearts of their
adversaries.
CREW QUALITY: Talented (Attribute 10, Department 3)
TRAIT: Dominion Warship
SCALE: 3 RESISTANCE: 2
SHIELDS (13):
Systems
COMMS 07
ENGINES 08
STRUCTURE 06
COMPUTERS 07
SENSORS 10
WEAPONS 10
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE 01
CONN 05
SECURITY 04
SCIENCE 01
Attacks
§ PHASED POLARON BEAM BANKS: Energy, Medium,
Damage 6, Intense, Piercing
§ DISRUPTOR CANNON: Energy, Close, Damage 7,
Intense
§ PHOTON TORPEDOES: Torpedo, Long, Damage 5,
High Yield
§ TRACTOR BEAM (STRENGTH 2)
Talents
§ ANTI-CLOAK SENSORS: Dominion vessels are
fitted with antiproton beam scanners and long-range
tachyon scanners, that allow them to reliably detect
cloaked vessels. Dominion vessels may always attack
cloaked ships, though the Difficulty of attacks against
a cloaked ship increases by 1.
§ IMPROVED IMPULSE DRIVE: See page 223.
§ IMPROVED REACTION CONTROL SYSTEM:
See page 224.
THOMAS MARRONE
Jem’Hadar Battlecruiser
A powerful warship capable of subjugating planets or
standing in battle against the starships of most opponents.
CREW QUALITY: Talented (Attribute 10, Department 3)
TRAIT: Dominion Warship
SCALE: 6 RESISTANCE: 6
SHIELDS (23):
Systems
COMMS 09
ENGINES 09
STRUCTURE 12
COMPUTERS 08
SENSORS 10
WEAPONS 12
Departments
COMMAND 03
ENGINEERING 02
MEDICINE
–
CONN 02
SECURITY 05
SCIENCE 01
Attacks
§ PHASED POLARON BEAM ARRAY: Energy, Medium,
Damage 9, Intense, Piercing, Area or Spread
§ PHOTON TORPEDOES: Torpedo, Long, Damage 6,
High Yield
§ TRACTOR BEAM (STRENGTH 5)
Talents
§ ADVANCED TRANSPORTERS: See page 219.
§ ANTI-CLOAK SENSORS: Dominion vessels are
fitted with antiproton beam scanners and long-range
tachyon scanners that allow them to reliably detect
cloaked vessels. Dominion vessels may always attack
cloaked ships, though the Difficulty of attacks against
a cloaked ship increases by 1.
§ BACKUP EPS CONDUITS: See page 220.
§ HIGH-INTENSITY ENERGY WEAPONS: See page 223.
§ IMPROVED POWER SYSTEMS: See page 223.
§ RAPID FIRE TORPEDO LAUNCHER: See page 225.
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
367
: . CHAPTER 11.4
CREATURES
Berengarian Dragon
Major NPC
A huge animal more than 200 meters in length from
nose to tail-tip, the dragons of Berengaria VII are capa-
ble of flight and breath fire. Their scale colors tend to
vary from lavender to purple to violet.
TRAITS: Berengarian Dragon, Flying, Massive, Animal
VALUES: Arboreal hunter, Pays small creatures little heed
FOCUSES: Hunting, Melee, Observation
PERSONAL THREAT: 8 PROTECTION: 4
Attributes
CONTROL 10
FITNESS 12
PRESENCE 10
DARING 12
INSIGHT 05
REASON 04
Moopsy
Notable NPC
Deceptively cute, the moopsy is actually a terrifying
predatory creature that bites its prey and injects venom
that dissolves bone. It then slurps up the prey’s skeletal
slush.
TRAITS: Moopsy, Deceptive,
Small, Venomous
VALUE: Moopsy!
PERSONAL THREAT: 3
PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 03
PRESENCE 06
DARING 05
REASON 03
FITNESS 03
INSIGHT 05
368
CHAPTER 11
Departments
COMMAND 03
ENGINEERING
–
MEDICINE
CONN
–
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE
Attacks
§ Claws: Melee, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Area
§ Bite: Melee, Deadly 5, Size 1H, Debilitating, Piercing
§ Fire Breath: Ranged, Deadly 3, Size 1H, Area
Special Rule
§ MASSIVE: The Berengarian Dragon is massive. It
must suffer three Injuries before it is defeated.
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING
–
MEDICINE
CONN
–
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE
Attack
§ Venomous Bite: Melee, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense,
Piercing
Special Rule
§ BONE-DISSOLVING VENOM: When the moopsy
successfully injures a living being, it injects a lethal
venom that dissolves the being’s skeletal system.
CBS STUDIOS, INC.
–
–
–
–
Mugato
Notable NPC
Native to Neural, mugato are powerful, white-furred
creatures with a large horn on their head and a venom-
ous bite. In some regions, they are known as gumato,
mugutu, mogatu, or muguto.
TRAITS: Mugato, Venomous, Animal
VALUE: Territorial hunter
FOCUSES: Melee, Tracking
PERSONAL THREAT: 3 PROTECTION: 1
Attributes
CONTROL 06
FITNESS 11
PRESENCE 10
DARING 08
INSIGHT 04
REASON 06
Neural Parasite
Minor NPC
Neural parasites are small creatures that attach them-
selves to targets and take over the host body, inducing
insanity and then death. Neural parasites are migratory,
and have been encountered in a number of locations
across the Galaxy, including Deneva, Levinius V, and
Ingraham B.
TRAITS: Neural Parasite, Limited Flight, Animal
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 09
FITNESS 08
PRESENCE 05
DARING 04
INSIGHT 04
REASON 06
Sehlat
Notable NPC
Native to Vulcan, sehlats are large predatory creatures
with fangs and claws, and are generally light brown to
dark gray in color. They are fearsome in the wild, but can
be domesticated up to a point.
TRAITS: Sehlat, Desert Predator, Animal
VALUE: Territorial hunter
FOCUSES: Melee, Stealth
PERSONAL THREAT: 3 PROTECTION: 2
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING
–
MEDICINE
CONN
–
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE
Attacks
§ Claws: Melee, Deadly 3, Size 1H, Intense
§ Bite: Melee, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Cumbersome,
Debilitating
Special Rule
§ VENOMOUS: After successfully biting an enemy, a
mugato may spend 1 Threat to inject them with ven-
om. This creates a Poisoned Injury, and the creature
remains defeated until a cure for the poison is found.
–
–
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING
–
MEDICINE
–
CONN
–
SECURITY 01
SCIENCE
–
Attack
§ Unarmed Strike: Melee, Stun 2, Size 1H
Special Rule
§ ATTACH: When a neural parasite makes a melee at-
tack, it attaches itself to its victim rather than inflicting
an Injury. If it succeeds, it fuses with the creature’s
nervous system and takes control of it.
Attributes
CONTROL 08
FITNESS 12
DARING 11
INSIGHT 06
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING
–
CONN
–
SECURITY 03
Attack
PRESENCE 09
REASON 02
MEDICINE
–
SCIENCE
–
§ Claws and Teeth: Melee, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense,
Debilitating
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES
369
Talarian Hook Spider
Minor NPC
Found in warm environments, Talarian hook spiders are
small arachnids with legs a half-meter in length.
TRAITS: Talarian Hook Spider, Lurking, Arachnid
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 1
Attributes
CONTROL 10
FITNESS 08
PRESENCE 02
DARING 07
INSIGHT 02
REASON 04
Targ
Minor nPC
Native to Qo’noS, targs are cultivated as livestock or pets,
though wild targs are hunted for their meat and milk.
TRAITS: Targ, Stubborn Beast, Animal
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 04
FITNESS 11
PRESENCE 08
DARING 10
INSIGHT 05
REASON 02
Tribble
Minor NPC
Tribbles are small, furry life-forms native to the plant Iota
Geminorum IV. They make soft, calming, purring sounds
when touched, and breed at an alarming rate. When
close to Klingons, tribbles emit a high-pitched shriek.
TRAITS: Tribble, Animal
PERSONAL THREAT: 0 PROTECTION: 0
Attributes
CONTROL 04
FITNESS 04
PRESENCE 09
DARING 08
INSIGHT 06
REASON 06
370
CHAPTER 11
Departments
COMMAND 01
ENGINEERING
–
MEDICINE
–
CONN
–
SECURITY 03
SCIENCE
–
Attacks
§ Hooks: Melee, Stun 3, Size 1H
§ Bite: Melee, Deadly 4, Size 1H, Intense
Special Rule
§ WEB: As a major action, a hook spider can fill its zone
with sticky webbing. This makes the zone difficult
terrain with a cost of 1, or adds 1 to the cost of any
existing difficult terrain.
Departments
COMMAND 02
ENGINEERING
–
MEDICINE
CONN
–
SECURITY 02
SCIENCE
Attack
§ Tusks: Melee, Stun/Deadly 3, Size 1H)
Special Rules
§ RUSH: As a major action, a targ may charge at an
enemy within Medium range. The targ moves to any
adjacent zone, and makes a melee attack against the
chosen enemy. If the attack hits, the enemy is also
knocked prone.
–
–
Departments
COMMAND
–
ENGINEERING 01
MEDICINE
–
CONN
–
SECURITY
–
SCIENCE 01
Attack
§ None
Special Rule
§ KLINGON DISDAIN: A tribble’s reaction is strong
enough to automatically detect the presence of a
Klingon—even one disguised or surgically altered—
within Close range, while a disguised Klingon must
attempt a Control + Command task with a Difficulty
of 2 to mask their disgust at the tribble’s presence.
AARON HARVEY
NAME
 personnel file
PRONOUNS
RANK ASSIGNMENT
CHARACTER ROLE
REPUTATION
SPECIES & TRAITS
ENVIRONMENT UPBRINGING
DETERMINATION
CAREER PATH
EXPERIENCE
PROTECTION
STRESS
CAREER EVENT 1
CAREER EVENT 2
CONTROL
ATTRIBUTES FITNESS PRESENCE
COMMAND
DEPARTMENTS
ENGINEERING
MEDICINE
DARING INSIGHT
VALUES
REASON
CONN
SECURITY
SCIENCE
SPECIES ABILITY
TALENTS
FOCUSES
PASTIMES
SPECIAL RULES
ATTACKS
OTHER EQUIPMENT
TM & © 2024 CBS Studios Inc. STAR TREK and related marks and logos are trademarks of CBS Studios, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Permission granted to photocopy this page for personal use only.
 STARSHIP REGISTRY ENTRY
REGISTRY
DATE ENTERED
SERVICE
REFITS
NAME
RESISTANCE
MISSION PROFILE SERVICE RECORD
SCALE
CREW
SUPPORT
TRAITS
SYSTEMS
DEPARTMENTS
SMALL CRAFT
READINESS
COMMS ENGINES STRUCTURE
breaches
breaches breaches
COMMAND ENGINEERING MEDICINE
COMPUTERS SENSORS WEAPONS
breaches breaches breaches
CONN SECURITY SCIENCE
SHUTTLEBAY
SHIELDS
ATTACKS
SPECIAL RULES
TALENTS
TM & © 2024 CBS Studios Inc. STAR TREK and related marks and logos are trademarks of CBS Studios, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Permission granted to photocopy this page for personal use only.
NAME
 personal Log
ENTRY
NO.
ADVENTURE TITLE AND
MISSION DESCRIPTION
VALUES OR
DIRECTIVES USED NOTES
TM & © 2024 CBS Studios Inc. STAR TREK and related marks and logos are trademarks of CBS Studios, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Permission granted to photocopy this page for personal use only.
Abandon Ship................................................ 311
Acclaim. ........................................................... 172
Adapting Reputation................................... 170
Advanced Operations................................. 268
Adversary Momentum. ............................... 325
Aenar................................................................ 101
Age. ................................................................... 127
Agriculture or Rural. ..................................... 118
Aid and Relief. ...................................................57
Alien Energy Weapons. ............................... 244
Alternate Universes........................................79
Alter Trait. ........................................................ 293
Ambassador. .................................................. 200
Andorian. ......................................................... 100
Antiproton Beam. .......................................... 228
Armor and Protective Gear....................... 244
Armored Vest and Body Armor. ............... 245
Arrays............................................................... 228
Artistic and Creative. ................................... 118
Assist. ............................................ 300, 301, 303
Assistance in Combat. ................................ 291
A Star Trek Primer...........................................11
Attack............................................................... 289
Attack Fighter................................................ 235
Attack Pattern. ............................................... 302
Attacks............................................................. 289
Attacks, Hazards, and Damage. ............... 306
Attempting an Extended Task.................. 271
Attempting a Starship Attack. ................... 307
Attempting a Task. ...............................253, 257
Attributes. ...........................................................88
Augment and Cybernetic Talents. ........... 155
Augments. ....................................................... 114
Automated Defenses.................................. 219
Automatic Return......................................... 220
Awards. ............................................................ 173
Away Teams......................................................58
Backup EPS Conduits................................. 220
Bajoran. ............................................................ 102
Basic Operations.......................................... 250
Battlecruiser. .................................................. 212
Battling Very Large Adversaries.............. 298
Being Prone. ................................................... 288
Berengarian Dragon.................................... 368
Betazoid. .......................................................... 103
Bodyguard. ...................................................... 138
Bonus Momentum....................................... 260
Borg Collective..........................................27, 31
Breach. ............................................................. 310
Breaches and Potent Traits....................... 310
Breakthrough Effects.................................. 330
Breakthroughs. .............................................. 272
B’rel-class Bird of Prey.......................207, 364
California......................................................... 201
Cannon............................................................ 228
Captain’s Yacht. ....................................220, 235
Captain T’Mek............................................... 354
Cardassian. ..................................................... 104
Cardassian Glinn.......................................... 358
Cardassian Soldier. ...................................... 358
Career Event.................................................. 128
Career Path. .................................................... 120
Cargo Bay. ....................................................... 188
Cargo Transporter. ..........................................18
Carrying Capacity. ........................................ 240
Challenges. .................................. 268, 329, 332
Changelings......................................................28
Change Position........................................... 300
Changing Traits. ............................................ 252
Chaos Theory...................................................81
374 Index
Index
Character Arcs.............................................. 168
Character Development. ............................ 166
Character Role. ....................................... 87, 135
Characters...................................................... 353
Chief Engineer. .............................................. 136
Chief Medical Officer.................................. 137
Chief of Security........................................... 136
Chief Tactical Officer. .................................. 137
Choosing a Species. .......................................99
Choosing Values. .............................................97
Chroniton........................................................ 229
Chronitons.........................................................82
Civilian (Official)............................................ 126
Civilian (Physician)....................................... 125
Civilian (Scientist). ........................................ 125
Civilian (Trader)............................................. 126
Cloaking Device. ........................................... 220
Close. ................................................................ 295
Coalition of Planets. .................................20, 28
Collision Damage......................................... 309
Combat Actions............................................ 288
Command.......................................91, 183, 301
Commanding Officer. .................................. 135
Command Major Actions. .......................... 301
Command Ship............................................. 220
Command Station........................................ 186
Command Talents........................................ 156
Commission Without The Academy...... 123
Common Equipment................................... 238
Common Momentum Options. ................ 260
Common Momentum Spends. ................. 260
Communication and Perception............. 286
Communications.................................187, 301
Communications Major Actions............. 301
Communications Officer. ........................... 138
Communication Technology. .......................16
Communicator. .............................................. 246
Compact Vessel............................................ 196
Complication Range. ................................... 258
Complications............................................... 258
Computers. ..................................................... 180
Conflict. ............................................................ 275
Conflict Resolution.........................................55
Conflict Structure......................................... 277
Conn.......................................................... 91, 183
Conn Talents.................................................. 158
Consequences and Threat. ....................... 331
Constitution-class...............................198, 363
Constitution III. .............................................. 205
Contact............................................................ 295
Continuous Threats........................................76
Control................................................................88
Cosmic Rays and Radiation.........................76
Cover................................................................ 287
Cover and Concealment............................ 308
Covert Operations...........................................60
Create Trait.....289, 300, 301, 302, 303, 304,
305
Creating an NPC. .......................................... 348
Creating a Supporting Character. ........... 146
Creation in Play............................................. 142
Creatures. ........................................................ 368
Crew on Another Civilizations Ship. ..........61
Crew Quality. .................................................. 348
Crew Support. ................................................ 185
Culture................................................................12
Cybernetics.................................................... 245
Cyborgs........................................................... 114
D7 Battlecruiser. ..................................206, 364
DaiMon Skel. .................................................. 360
Damage and Repairs. .................................. 306
Damage Bonus from Weapons Rating.. 226
Damage Control. ..................................301, 303
Dangers of Space. ...........................................75
Daring. .................................................................88
D’Deridex-class Warbird............................ 365
Dealt with a Plague. ..................................... 129
Death of a Friend. ......................................... 129
Deception....................................................... 280
Deception Against Player Characters... 282
Deep Space Exploration...............................54
Defense and Aid Missions...........................57
Defensive Fire. ............................................... 305
Denobulan...................................................... 105
Departments. ....................................................90
Department Values.........................................90
Detapa Council................................................25
Determination. ............................................... 261
Determination Spends. ............................... 262
Devastating Attack. ...................................... 307
Difficult Terrain. ....................................286, 296
Difficulty Zero tasks..................................... 254
Dilithium.............................................................77
Diplomacy. .........................................................55
Diplomacy and Politics............................... 118
Diplomatic Corps. ......................................... 124
Diplomatic Missions. ...............................55, 59
Direct. ......................................................289, 301
Directives...............................................322, 323
Disarm. ............................................................. 293
Disruptor......................................................... 228
Distance and Perception........................... 286
Distances........................................................ 295
Distances and Communication............... 286
Distances and Range. ................................. 286
Distances and Sensors. .............................. 296
Dithering. ......................................................... 325
Division 14.........................................................44
D’Kora-class Marauder. .....................211, 366
Dual Environment. ........................................ 221
Duty Assignments. ..........................................51
Early Energy Weapons. ............................... 244
Effect of Traits. ............................................... 251
Effects of Reputation. .................................. 169
Eject the Reactor.......................................... 311
Electromagnetic or Ionic........................... 228
Electromagnetic Spectrum. .........................74
Electronic Warfare Systems. ..................... 222
Emerald Chain. .................................................26
Emergency Medical Hologram. ............... 222
Emergency Medical Hologram (EMH).....18
Encountered a Truly Alien Being. ............ 130
Encounters..................................................... 250
Energy Weapon Delivery Systems.......... 228
Energy Weapons. .......................................... 227
Engineering. ...................................91, 183, 188
Engineering Devices. .................................. 246
Engineering Talents. .................................... 159
Engines. ........................................................... 180
Enlisting in Other Organizations........13, 42,
321, 328
Environment. .................................................. 115
Environmental Actions............................... 328
Environmental Effects. ................................ 326
Environmental traits. .................................... 320
Environment and Zones............................. 294
Environments and Zones........................... 284
Environment Suit.......................................... 245
Equipment...................................................... 141
Equipment and Technology...................... 256
Equipment Trait. ...................................238, 251
Eras of Play........................................................30
Eras on screen. .................................................30
Escalation....................................................... 347
Escalation Costs........................................... 239
Escort..................................................................57
Esoteric Talents. ............................................ 155
Espionage / Intelligence. ........................... 213
Evasive Action............................................... 302
Evidence. ......................................................... 281
Example Difficulties. .................................... 254
Example Shield Track. ................................. 308
Excelsior-class.............................................. 199
Executive Officer.......................................... 136
Expanded Emergency Medical Facilities. ....
222
Expanded Munitions. .................................. 222
Expansive Department (X). ........................ 222
Experienced. .................................................. 128
Expert. .............................................................. 138
Exploration and Scientific Missions. .........58
Exploratory Division. .......................................42
Extended Consequences.................271, 331
Extended Tasks.......................... 268, 271, 329
External Factors in Opposed Tasks........ 256
Extra Major Action....................................... 293
Falling. .............................................................. 287
Fast Targeting Systems.............................. 223
Federation Citizens and Money.14, 17, 318
Federation Civilians in a Civilian Setting. .61
Federation Council.........................................44
Federation-Klingon War................................22
Ferengi. ............................................................ 106
Ferengi Alliance. .......................................25, 26
Ferengi Commerce Authority. .....................26
Ferengi Menial.............................................. 359
Ferengi Salesman........................................ 360
Finishing Touches. ....................................... 194
Fire.................................................................... 305
First Aid. ........................................................... 289
First Contact. ........................................... 56, 130
Fitness. ................................................................89
Fitness and Strength. .....................................90
Flagship........................................................... 213
Fleet admirals...................................................44
Fleet Operations..............................................57
Flight Controller............................................ 137
Focuses..............................................................93
Food Chain........................................................70
Foreshadowing............................................. 324
Foreword.............................................................. 2
Founders............................................................28
Framing the Action...................................... 317
Gaining Determination............................... 263
Galaxy. .................................................................64
Galaxy-class..........................................202, 363
Galor-class. ............................................210, 366
Gamemaster....................................................... 6
Gamemastering............................................ 315
Gaming Aids. ....................................................... 6
Gamma-Ray Bursts.........................................75
Gated Challenges. ........................................ 332
General Talents............................................. 149
Going to Warp. ............................................... 295
Grand Nagus. ....................................................26
Grappler Cable.............................................. 196
Gravimetric..................................................... 229
Gravitational Time Dilation. ..........................82
Graviton Beam. .............................................. 228
Group Challenges........................................ 268
Gul Tremak..................................................... 359
Hazard Damage and Threat Costs
(Starships). ............................................... 328
Hazardous terrain. ........................................ 297
Hazard Severity and Threat Costs
(Personal). ................................................ 328
Helm........................................................187, 302
Helm Major Actions. .................................... 302
Helm Minor Actions.................................... 302
Hertzprung-Russell Diagram. ......................73
High-Intensity Energy Weapons. ............. 223
High-Power Tractor Beam......................... 223
High-Resolution Sensors. .......................... 223
Hobus. .................................................................24
Holodeck. ........................................................ 189
Holodecks. .........................................................17
Holograms.........................................................17
Hologram Technology. ...................................17
How Many Shuttlecraft Do We Have?... 186
Human............................................................. 107
Humanoids........................................................70
Immediate Momentum Spends. .............. 264
Improving the Odds..................................... 255
Improvised Armaments. ............................. 231
Improvised Attacks...................................... 242
Impulse............................................................ 302
Injuries............................................................. 290
Injury Complications................................... 292
Insight.................................................................89
Intelligence Agent. ....................................... 138
Interact. ............................................................ 300
Interactive Objects. ...................................... 288
Intimidation.................................................... 282
Intrepid. ............................................................ 203
Jem’Hadar Attack Ship. ............................... 367
Jem’Hadar Battlecruiser. ............................ 367
Jem’Hadar First............................................. 361
Jem’Hadar Warrior....................................... 361
Keeping the Initiative. .................................. 277
Keep The Initiative. ....................................... 293
Klingon. ............................................................ 108
Klingon Empire. ................................................21
Klingon Veteran. ............................................ 355
Klingon Warrior............................................. 355
Landing Gear................................................. 196
Lauded by Another Culture. ...................... 130
Launch Probe................................................ 304
Learned Unique Language....................... 130
Life-Cycle of Stars...........................................73
Lifepath Process
Step 1: Species_
99
___________________
Step 2: Environment_
115
______________
Step 3: Upbringing_
117
_______________
Step 4: Career path_
120
_______________
Step 5: Experience_
127
_______________
Step 6: Career Events_
128
_____________
Step 7: Finishing Touches_
132
_________
Linear Challenges........................................ 332
Location Trait................................................. 251
Log Entries. ..................................................... 166
Long-Duration Missions. ...............................52
Long-Term Repairs. ...................................... 312
Main Character.................................................. 6
Main Characters..............................................86
Major Actions................................................ 298
Major NPC................................... 346, 347, 349
Major Verohk, Tal Shiar Agent. ................. 357
Managing the Rules.................................... 316
Maneuver. ....................................................... 302
Medical-Babble Generator. ....................... 267
Medical Devices........................................... 246
Medicine.................................................. 92, 184
Medicine Talents.......................................... 164
Medium........................................................... 295
Melee Weapons. ........................................... 242
Mentored........................................................ 130
Merchant. ........................................................ 138
Milestones. ..................................................... 166
Minor Actions. ......................................288, 298
Minor NPC. .................................. 346, 347, 348
Mission Profile. .............................................. 193
Mission Profiles............................................ 212
Mission Types. ..................................................54
Mixed-Heritage Characters. .........................99
Modular Laboratories................................. 224
Modulate Shields......................................... 305
Momentum. .................................................... 259
Moopsy............................................................ 368
Moq’var, Son of Koloth. ............................... 356
Movement and Terrain......................286, 296
Mugato. ............................................................ 369
Multi-Role Consoles.................................... 187
Multirole Explorer. ........................................ 214
Narrative Changes....................................... 326
Navigator. ...............................................137, 303
Navigator Major Actions............................ 303
Nebula. ................................................................72
Negative Influences. .................................... 171
Negotiated a Treaty..................................... 130
Negotiation. .................................................... 283
Neural Parasite. ............................................. 369
Neutronic........................................................ 229
Ni’Var...................................................................25
Non-Academy Crew.......................................49
Non-Carbon Based Life-forms....................71
Non-Federation Characters and
Campaigns................................................... 4
Non-Humanoid Life-forms...........................71
Non-Key Tasks............................................... 332
Non-Player Characters........................ 86, 346
Non-Starfleet Characters and Campaigns. ..
61
Non-Starfleet Crew in a Starfleet Setting. ....
61
Non-Starfleet Spaceframes...................... 206
Notable Civilizations. ......................................19
Notable NPC............................... 346, 347, 348
Novice.............................................................. 127
NPC Categories............................................ 346
NPCs and Injury. ........................................... 291
NPCs and Personal Threat. ....................... 346
NPCs and Starship Operations. ............... 296
NPCs and Stress. .......................................... 278
NPCs and Values.......................................... 346
NPCs as Opposition.................................... 347
NPCs on Either Side. ................................... 347
NPC Special Rules....................................... 349
NPC Starships............................................... 348
NPC Vessel Crew Qualities....................... 296
NX-class. .......................................................... 197
Nyberrite Alliance...........................................29
Observation.................................................... 255
Observation teams. .........................................58
Obsidian Order.................................................25
Obstacle Momentum Costs. ..................... 287
Obstacles........................................................ 287
Obtain Information. ...................................... 293
Obtaining Equipment.................................. 238
Omnitemporal Beings and Artifacts. .........83
Operations................................... 188, 249, 303
Operations/Engineering Major Actions.......
303
Operations Manager................................... 136
Opportunity Costs. ....................................... 239
Opposed Tasks. ............................................. 256
Orion. ................................................................ 109
Orion Multi-key. ............................................. 247
Orion Syndicate. ...............................................26
Other Equipment.......................................... 246
Other Roles. .................................................... 138
Index
375
Other Senses................................................. 286
Other Sources of Threat. ............................ 325
Other Tasks. ...........................................289, 300
Other Uses for Momentum....................... 261
Other Ways of Applying Traits.................. 322
Override. .......................................................... 300
Pakleds...............................................................29
Pass. .........................................................289, 300
Pastimes. ......................................................... 133
Patrol......................................................... 57, 214
Pattern Enhancer. ......................................... 247
Peacekeeping and Military Missions. ......60,
64, 72, 73, 74, 75, 77, 78, 79, 82, 83
Personal Conflict.................................276, 284
Personal Conflict Major Actions............. 289
Personal Conflict Minor Actions............. 288
Personal Conflict Momentum Spends.. 293
Personal Details. ........................................... 132
Personal Forcefield. ..................................... 245
Personal Trait. ................................................ 251
Personnel Quarters. ........................................53
Personnel Support. ...................................... 240
Personnel Transporter. ..................................18
Phased Polaron Beam................................ 228
Phase/Pulse. .................................................. 228
Phaser.............................................................. 228
Phasers. ........................................................... 243
Planetary Anomalies......................................69
Planetary Exploration and Survey..............54
Planets................................................................64
Planet Types
Class-D_
66
__________________________
Class-H_
66
__________________________
Class-J_
67
___________________________
Class-K_
67
__________________________
Class-L_
68
__________________________
Class-M_
65
_________________________
Class-T_
68
__________________________
Class-Y_
69
__________________________
Plasma............................................................. 229
Player Characters............................................86
Player-Facing Advancement. .................... 168
Playing Things Out. ...................................... 317
Polaron. ............................................................ 229
Political Liaison............................................. 139
Positions and Starship Combat Actions.......
299
Positive Influences. ...................................... 171
Positron........................................................... 230
Potent traits.................................................... 321
Predators and Aggressive Creatures. .......70
Prepare...................................................300, 305
Prepare for Battle. ......................................... 298
Presence............................................................89
Prime Directive in Play. ..................................47
Protection. ....................................................... 292
Proton Beam.................................................. 228
Protostar. ............................................................72
Q Continuum. ....................................................29
Qualities. .......................................................... 226
Quantum. ......................................................... 230
Quantum Multiverses....................................79
Rally. .................................................................. 301
Random System Hit..................................... 307
Rank. ................................................................. 140
Rapid-Fire Torpedo Launcher.................. 225
Reaching a Milestone................................. 167
Ready. ......................................................289, 300
Rear Admiral Thy'ran. .................................. 354
Reason................................................................89
Recovering Stress........................................ 278
Recovery and Healing. ................................ 292
Red Giant. ...........................................................73
376 Index
Reduced Sensor Silhouette...................... 225
Redundant Systems (X). ............................. 225
Refits. .......................................................193, 217
Refit Selection............................................... 217
Regain Power. ................................................ 303
Regenerate Shields. ..................................... 303
Relief Missions. ................................................60
Religion and Spirituality................................14
Reprimand...................................................... 172
Reprimands.................................................... 175
Reputation.............................................169, 170
Reputation Roll. ............................................. 171
Re-rolls. ............................................................ 253
Reroute Power. .............................................. 303
Research and Development........................55
Reserve Power.....................................185, 296
Resistance................................... 185, 308, 331
Resisting Persuasion. .................................. 280
Rest................................................................... 278
Restore. ............................................................ 300
Reveal. .............................................................. 304
Risks, Costs, and Consequences. ........... 320
Romulan.......................................................... 110
Romulan Centurion. ..................................... 357
Romulan Empire..............................................23
Romulan Uhlan. ............................................. 356
Rounding. ........................................................ 254
Rugged Design. ............................................. 225
Rules and Roleplaying. ................................ 280
Runabout. ........................................................ 234
Sample Focuses..............................................94
Sample Values. .................................................96
Scale................................................................. 182
Scan For Weakness..................................... 304
Scene Framing Tricks................................. 318
Scenes and Traits. ........................................ 250
Scene set-up. ................................................. 250
Science. ...........................................92, 184, 188
Science and Exploration Missions............54
Science and Technology. ........................... 119
Science Labs................................................. 189
Science Officer. ............................................. 137
Science Talents. ............................................ 162
Scientific and Survey Operations. ........... 215
Secondary Reactors.................................... 225
Second Contact...............................................56
Section 31. .........................................................44
Section 31 Operative. .................................. 353
Sectors. ........................................................64, 65
Security. .................................................... 92, 184
Security Talents............................................ 161
Sehlat............................................................... 369
Sensor Operations....................................... 304
Sensor Operations Major Actions.......... 304
Sensor Operations Minor Actions.......... 304
Sensors. ........................................................... 181
Sensor Sweep............................................... 304
Serious Injury. ................................................ 131
Service Record. ....................................193, 216
Service Roles................................................. 135
Session 0. ...........................................................87
Setbacks. ......................................................... 331
Set Phasers to Stun..................................... 292
Shaken: Minor Damage Results. ............. 308
Shields............................................................. 185
Ship’s Doctor................................................. 137
Ship’s (or Station’s) Counselor. ................ 138
Ship Stations and Facilities. ...................... 186
Shuttlebay. ...................................................... 189
Shuttlecraft. .................................................... 233
Shuttlepod...................................................... 233
Shuttle Variants. ............................................ 233
Sickbay. ............................................................ 190
Situation Trait. ................................................ 251
Small Craft...................................................... 232
Small Craft Readiness. ................................ 186
Social Conflict......................................276, 279
Social Conflict in Combat.......................... 283
Social Extended Tasks. ............................... 330
Social Tools.................................................... 280
Society................................................................15
Solar Flares. .......................................................75
Solar Wind.........................................................76
Sources of Conflict...................................... 323
Sovereign........................................................ 204
Space-Based Phenomena. ...........................72
Spacefaring Life-forms..................................71
Spaceframe.................................................... 192
Spaceframe Details..................................... 195
Spaceframes. ................................................. 195
Spaceframe Special Rules........................ 196
Spacetime and Subspace. ............................77
Spatial.............................................................. 230
Special............................................................. 131
Special Rules....................................................95
Amphibious_
350
_____________________
Aquatic / Liquid Environment_
350
______
Camouflaged X_
350
__________________
Coordination_
350
____________________
Energy Based____________________
350
Extraordinary Attribute X_
350
__________
Fast Recovery_
350
___________________
Flight
351
___________________________
Formless_
351
_______________________
Hyper-Agile_
351
_____________________
Immune to X_
351
____________________
Incorporeal_
351
_____________________
Initiative X
351
_______________________
Intensive Training_
351
________________
Invulnerable_
351
_____________________
Machine_
352
________________________
Menacing X_
352
_____________________
Mimicry_
352
________________________
Multidimensional_
352
________________
Multi-Limbed_
352
____________________
Natural Protection X_
352
______________
Night Vision_
352
_____________________
Ram
352
___________________________
Resilient_
352
________________________
Sense Spectrum_
352
_________________
Sturdy_
352
__________________________
Threat Gesture_
352
__________________
Tool User_
352
_______________________
Toxic, Poisonous, or Venomous_
352
____
Species...............................................................87
Species and Culture Talents. .................... 151
Spectral Classes. .............................................73
Spending Determination. ........................... 262
Spending Momentum. ................................ 259
Spending Threat........................................... 326
Sprint................................................................ 289
Standard Issue Gear. ................................... 239
Standard Major Actions............................. 300
Standard Minor Actions............................. 300
Stardates............................................................16
Starfleet..............................................................41
Starfleet Academy. ..........................................48
Starfleet Across the Eras..............................43
Starfleet Command........................................42
Starfleet Commander-in-Chief. ...................44
Starfleet (Enlisted). ....................................... 123
Starfleet Enlisted Crew. .............................. 140
Starfleet (Intelligence)................................ 123
Starfleet (Officer).......................................... 120
Starfleet Officer. ............................................ 353
Starfleet Officers. .......................................... 140
Starfleet or Military...................................... 119
Starfleet Research & Development. ..........43
Starfleet Science.............................................43
Starfleet's Mandate........................................42
Starfleet Spaceframes................................ 197
Starship Combat Example. ...............312, 313
Starship Combat Momentum Spends. .. 307
Starship Conflict..................................276, 294
Starship Creation. ......................................... 192
Starship Creation Process. ........................ 193
Starship Damage. ......................................... 309
Starship Departments. ................................ 181
Starship Details. ............................................ 179
Starship Focuses. ......................................... 182
Starship Fundamentals.............................. 178
Starship Scales............................................. 182
Starship Systems. ......................................... 180
Starship Talents...................................182, 218
Starship Terrains. .......................................... 297
Starship Traits. ............................................... 179
Starship Weaponry. ...................................... 226
Star System.......................................................64
Star Trek Essentials........................................12
Stellar Classification. ......................................73
Stellar Life-Cycle. .............................................72
Stellar Phenomenon Survey........................55
Strange New Worlds......................................64
Strategic and Diplomatic Operations. .... 215
Stress........................................................ 93, 277
Stress and Avoiding Injury. ........................ 292
Stress Track Example. ................................. 277
Structure......................................................... 181
Structure and Resistance.......................... 185
Styles, Forms of Address, and Pronouns.....
134
Subsequent EMH Models. ........................ 222
Subspace...........................................................78
Success at Cost............................................ 259
Supernovae.......................................................76
Supervisory Characters. ............................. 147
Supporting Characters....................6, 86, 144
Support Operation..........................................57
Survey teams....................................................58
System and Department Interactions. ... 183
Systems and Their Suggested Uses...... 180
Tachyons............................................................83
Tactical. ...................................................188, 305
Tactical Major Actions. ............................... 305
Tactical Minor Actions. ............................... 305
Tactical Operations. ..................................... 215
Talarian Hook Spider. .................................. 370
Talents. ................................................................95
Talking is a Free Action.............................. 298
Tal Shiar..............................................................24
Targ................................................................... 370
Targeting Solution. ....................................... 305
Taris, Vorta Overseer................................... 362
Task Difficulty................................................ 319
Tasks. .......................................................253, 319
Teamwork and Assistance........................ 255
Technobabble. ............................................... 266
Technobabble Generator. .......................... 266
Technology......16, 20, 21, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 31
Technology and Weapons......................... 237
Technology Through the Centuries. ..........32
Tellarite............................................................ 111
Temporal Fractures. ........................................82
Temporal Prime Directive.............................83
Terrain Momentum Costs. ......................... 287
Terran Universe. ...............................................79
Tetryon Beam. ................................................ 228
Tetryonic. ......................................................... 230
The Battlefield............................................... 284
The Bridge...................................................... 186
The Cast of Adversaries. ............................ 347
The Core Mechanic. ......................................... 8
The Gorgon's Gaze. ...................................... 336
The Prime Directive. .......................................45
The Temporal Prime Directive....................47
Tholian Assembly. ...........................................29
Threat............................................ 264, 317, 323
Threat and Player Characters. .................. 264
Threat and Task Difficulty.......................... 320
Threat and the Gamemaster. .................... 265
Threat as Momentum................................. 348
Threatening Circumstances..................... 325
Threat from the Player Characters. ......... 325
Threat Spends......................................265, 328
Thrusters. ........................................................ 302
Timed Challenges........................................ 333
Timeframe. ...................................................... 192
Time Particles. ..................................................82
Time Pressure............................................... 269
Time Travel........................................................81
T’Liss-class. ...........................................208, 365
Tools and Portable Items........................... 245
Torpedoes. ...................................................... 229
Torpedo Types. .............................................. 229
Tracking Traits............................................... 251
Tractor Beam. ........................................231, 305
Traits.................................................87, 250, 321
Transient Threats............................................75
Translator........................................................ 139
Transphasic. ................................................... 230
Transport. ...............................................301, 303
Transporter Accident.................................. 131
Transporter Failures and Accidents. ...... 191
Transporter Room........................................ 190
Transporters. .....................................................18
Transport Inhibitors..................................... 225
Treknobabble. ................................................ 252
Tribble.............................................................. 370
Tricobalt. .......................................................... 230
Tricorders. ....................................................... 245
Trill. .................................................................... 112
Turn Order. ...................................................... 277
Types of Energy Weapons......................... 228
Types of Time Travel. ......................................82
Ubringing........................................................ 117
Unique Life-forms. ...........................................71
United Federation of Planets. ......................19
Universal Translator. ............................. 17, 247
Untapped Potential...................................... 127
Unusual or Unique Characters. ................ 114
Using Consequences. ................................. 331
Using Maps and Miniatures..................... 285
Values. ....................................................... 87, 322
Values and Directives. ................................. 262
Variable Time Limit...................................... 270
Varied Intervals. ............................................. 269
Vessels and Zones....................................... 295
Veteran. ............................................................ 128
Vulcan. .............................................................. 113
Warp. ................................................................. 302
Warp Drive..................................................76, 77
Weapons...................................... 181, 241, 243
What is Roleplaying?................. 4, 5, 6, 12, 13
What You Need to Play................................6, 8
White Dwarf. ......................................................73
World War III. .....................................................20
Wormholes.................................................78, 82
Wrapping Things Up. ................................... 318
Zefram Cochrane. ............................................20
21st and 22nd Century Campaigns. ..........31
23rd Century Campaigns. .............................34
24th Century Campaigns. .............................37
25th Century Campaigns. .............................38
26th Century and Beyond.............................39
ACKNOWLedGEMenTS
The development team thanks the following: Gene Roddenberry; the cast and crew of every Star Trek series and motion
picture; John Van Citters, Marian Cordry, Stephen Zelin, Brian Lady, Brian Bromberg, Danwei Lando, Russell Spina, and
the rest of the team at Paramount, CBS Studios, and Nickelodeon; Ben Robinson; Thomas Marrone and the rest of the
team at Star Trek Online; Erin Macdonald, PhD; Eric Campbell, Sam de Leve, Aliza Pearl, and everyone involved with the
Streampunks; Joe Rousseau and the team at Star Trek Timelines; Dayton Ward; Scott Pearson; Michael Dismuke and all
the contributors to the Continuing Mission website; Al Spader; the development teams of the FASA, Last Unicorn Games,
and Decipher versions of Star Trek roleplaying games; and, especially, the countless Star Trek Adventures gamers who
have shared their support, comments, enthusiasm, and actual play reports and videos. Peace and long life to you all.
Special thanks to Underworld Games and The Dice Cup for hosting second edition playtesting, and to Andy Douthwaite
and Jess Gibbs for all their hard work. Thanks also to the playtesters of the first edition, as well as the playtesters for
second edition, including: Josh Allen, Leigh Barlow, Eleri Davies, Stuart Denoon-Stevens, Michael Dismuke, Nathan
Dowdell, Michael Freeman, Andrew Gregory, Tom Houghton, Ioan Huw Espley, James Finch, Conor Jack Hewison, Jim
Johnson, Jolyne Joestar, Yong Kim, Hannah Leach, Fred Love, Jessica Marbles, Justin Talsma, Troy Mepyans, David
Murcott, Connor Parker, Aaron M. Pollyea, Leanne Poundall, Matt Price, Helen Rees, Charlie Ridley, Denis Rodionov,
Miguel Rodriguez, Stefan Rosalind, Benjamin William Smith, Al Spader, Kieran Tegg, Paul Umbers, Dom Westerland, and
Sophie Williams. We also thank anyone we may have accidentally missed including here.
We also celebrate and remember all the members of the extended Star Trek family who have passed. Actors, writers,
producers, artists, staff members, fans, and more; far too many to name, but not so many to forget; without you, we would
not have such a vast Star Trek sandbox within which to play. Thank you, all.
Index
377
Canon Screen Timeline
2151–2154
Star Trek: Enterprise
2256–2258
Star Trek: Discovery (seasons 1 & 2)
2259–?
Star Trek: Strange New Worlds
2265–2269
Star Trek
2269–2270
Star Trek: The Animated Series
Early 2270s (7410.2)
Star Trek: The Motion Picture
2285 (8130.4)
Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan
2285 (8210.3)
Star Trek III: The Search for Spock
2286 & 1986 (8390)
Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home
2287 (8454.1)
Star Trek V: The Final Frontier
2293 (9521.6-9715.5)
Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Co
Prime Universe Timeline
2063 (April 5)
Zefram Cochrane
launches the Phoenix;
man achieves faster than
light flight. First contact
with Vulcan.
2153 (March)
Earth is attacked by a
Xindi probe, killing seven
million people.
2154 (November)
Alliance between Humans,
Vulcans, Andorians, and
Tellarites formed in response
to Romulan attacks.
2156–2160
Earth-Romulan War.
2267
First contact with the
so-called Mirror Universe.
2161 (August 12)
The United Federation of
Planets founded in San
Francisco on Earth.
2256–2257
Federation-Klingon War.
2258 (1050.8–1051.8)
U.S.S. Discovery lost with
all hands during battle
with the Control AI.
2293 (9521.6–9529.1)
Klingon moon, Praxis,
explodes. Khitomer Accords
signed bringing peace
between the Federation and
Klingon Empire.
2344
U.S.S. Enterprise-C lost
defending a Klingon colony at
Narendra III, cementing the
Federation/Klingon Alliance.
Terran Universe Timeline
Pre–2063
Terran Empire reaches Luna.
2063 (April 5)
First Contact with Vulcan after the
launch of the Phoenix results in the
Terran Empire killing the Vulcans and
seizing their ship.
2063–2155
The Terran Empire conquers the
Vulcans, Tellarites, Andorians,
Denobulans, and Orions.
2155
Hoshi Sato declares herself
Empress of the Terran Empire after
an encounter with the U.S.S. Defiant
from the Prime Universe.
2367 (44002.3)
Battle of Wolf 359 against
the Borg with a loss of 39
ships and 10k+ personnel.
2367–2368
Klingon Civil War.
2269 (46379.1)
Bajoran wormhole
discovered.
2257
The U.S.S. Discovery, under Terran
Captain Gabriel Lorca, is brought to
the mirror universe with the use of its
spore drive. Lorca is killed and Emperor
Georgiou travels with the crew of U.S.S.
Discovery back to the Prime universe.
2267
Several Prime Universe crew
members of the U.S.S. Enterprise
accidentally arrive on board the I.S.S.
Enterprise where Kirk encourages
Mirror Spock to begin a revolution.
2371 (48315.6–48317)
U.S.S. Voyager is lost
in the Badlands and
presumed destroyed.
2371
First contact with the
Dominion.
2387
Romulus is destroyed by
Hobus supernova.
2373–2375
Dominion War. 27th century
Various dates past,
present, and future:
2378 (54973.4)
Temporal Cold War.
U.S.S. Voyager returns
to Earth.
2385 (April 5)
Attack on Mars.
d Country
2293 & 2371 (48650.1)
Star Trek Generations
2364–2370
Star Trek: The Next Generation
2063 (April 4-5) & 2373 (50893.5)
Star Trek: First Contact
2369–2375
Star Trek: Deep Space Nine
2375
Star Trek: Insurrection
2371–2378
Star Trek: Voyager
2379 (56844.9)
Star Trek: Nemesis
2380–?
Star Trek: Lower Decks
2383–?
Star Trek: Prodigy
2399–2402
Star Trek: Picard
3189–?
Star Trek: Discovery (seasons 3–5)
2267–2270
As a result of Spock becoming
commander in chief and enacting
reforms, Earth is not equipped to
fight the Klingon-Cardassian Alliance.
2371–2375
The Terran Rebellion scores major
victories with some help from
Captain Sisko of the Prime Universe.
The rebels capture Regent Worf of
the Klingon-Cardassian Alliance.
3069 (approximate)
The Burn disaster.
3189–3190s
U.S.S. Discovery emerges from
the 23rd century.
The Emerald Chain criminal
syndicate collapses.
The revitalized Federation
encounters Species 10-C.
Unknown
The Romulan and Vulcan peoples
reunite and cohabitate Vulcan,
which they rename Ni’Var.
space,
the final
frontier...
“THERE’S NO SUCH THING AS
THE UNKNOWN_ONLY THINGS
TEMPORARILY HIDDEN, TEMPORARILY
NOT UNDERSTOOD.
_ CAPTAIN JAMES T. KIRK
The Star Trek Adventures roleplaying game takes you to the final frontier!
From the 21st through to the 32nd century, join Starfleet, the Klingon Empire, the Romulan Star Empire, and
countless other civilizations, and journey across the Star Trek universe with your crew. Explore strange new worlds,
encounter fantastical alien life-forms, and engage in dramatic adventures in a detailed and immersive Galaxy.
Tell your stories and unravel the mysteries of the unknown!
to BOLDLY GO WHERE NO ONE HAS GONE BEFORE!
This Star Trek Adventures core rulebook contains:
§ A complete and updated version of the 2d20 System
rules, designed for an authentic Star Trek experience.
§ An extensive primer on Star Trek, including details on
a range of societies, worlds, species, and the scientific
concepts that underpin this timeless universe.
§ Fourteen player character species to choose from,
including Andorian, Cardassian, Klingon, Orion,
and Vulcan.
§ Guidelines for both novice and experienced
gamemasters, offering advice on challenging your
players with dramatic and thoughtful gameplay
unique to the Star Trek universe.
§ Game statistics and graphics for 15 playable
starship classes, including Federation, Klingon,
and Romulan vessels.
§ Dozens of non-player characters, starships, and
creatures to populate your missions, including
Federation, Klingon, Cardassian, and Dominion.
§ Historical excerpts, personal logs, and intercepted
communications provide fresh perspectives and
insights from across the Galaxy.
§ Created by an expert Star Trek development team,
including a diverse mix of experienced and new
artists, designers, developers, editors, and writers.
MUH0142401PDF
Published by Modiphius Entertainment Ltd. Published by Modiphius Entertainment Ltd.
Phase II Core Rulebook Standard Edition
39 Harwood Road, London, SW6 4QP, England 39 Harwood Road, London, SW6 4QP, England
TM & © 2024 CBS Studios, Inc. © 2024 Paramount TM & © 2024 CBS Studios, Inc. © 2024 Paramount
Pictures Corp.STAR TREK and related marks and logos Pictures Corp.STAR TREK and related marks and logos
Modiphius Europe Ltd. Calle de Peñuelas 43, Local G y H, Madrid, Modiphius Europe Ltd. Calle de Peñuelas 43, Local G y H, Madrid,
are trademarks of CBS Studios, Inc. All Rights Reserved. are trademarks of CBS Studios, Inc. All Rights Reserved.Spain, 28005. | Tel: +34614367815 | safety@modiphius.com Spain, 28005. | Tel: +34614367815 | safety@modiphius.com
www.modiphius.us | www.modiphius.net | info@modiphius.com www.modiphius.us | www.modiphius.net | info@modiphius.com